Set #1
Talking Points
Sept 7, 2023

Talking Points Guide

Talking Point #1: ancient biotech -- Lakshmidhar and Qazi
Talking Point #2: bacteriocins -- Misbah and Srilatha
Talking Point #3: model organisms -- Kamalpreet and Rudra
Talking Point #4: e. coli -- Kushil Hareshkumar and Justin
Talking Point #5: yeast -- Jinal and Mitkumar ashokbhai
Talking Point #6: c. elegans -- Sienna and Therese
Talking Point #7: drosophila -- Freny Tusharkumar and Dhruvi Sanjaykumar
Talking Point #8: arabidopsis -- Sundip and Naba
Talking Point #9: zebrafish -- Alfredo and Jackie
Talking Point #10: mice -- Rutvi and Erick
Talking Point #11: frogs -- Mirajsinh and Hiba
Talking Point #12: monkey -- Pegah and Uzma
Talking Point #13: heterochromia -- Steve and Jannela
Talking Point #14: phage -- Bhargavi and Nirali Bharatbhai
Talking Point #15: cell culture -- Sonia and Bharat Kumar
Talking Point #16: subviral agents -- Jocelyn and Sowmya Reddy
Talking Point #17: prok transcript -- Het Bharatbhai and Serene
Talking Point #18: euk transcript -- Harnish Dilipbhai and Disha
Talking Point #19: protein translation -- Mansi and Anjali
Talking Point #20: symbiotic theory -- Veronica and Shubham
Primary Presenters

Helper Student #1: ancient biotech -- Sonia and Sowmya Reddy
Helper Student #2: bacteriocins -- Bhargavi and Jannela
Helper Student #3: model organisms -- Kushil Hareshkumar and Therese
Helper Student #4: e. coli -- Harnish Dilipbhai and Sienna
Helper Student #5: yeast -- Rutvi and Justin
Helper Student #6: c. elegans -- Misbah and Pegah
Helper Student #7: drosophila -- Kamalpreet and Veronica Gore
Helper Student #8: arabidopsis -- Rudra and Disha
Helper Student #9: zebrafish -- Jinal and Qazi Mohammed Mustafa Sayeed
Helper Student #10: mice -- Alfredo and Nirali Bharatbhai
Helper Student #11: frogs -- Erick and Steve
Helper Student #12: monkey -- Jocelyn and Veronica Leavy
Helper Student #13: heterochromia -- Mansi
Helper Student #14: phage -- Freny Tusharkumar and Shubham
Helper Student #15: cell culture -- Mitkumar ashokbhai and Anjali
Helper Student #16: subviral agents -- Jackie and Mirajsinh
Helper Student #17: prok transcript -- Srilatha and Hiba
Helper Student #18: euk transcript -- Uzma and Serene
Helper Student #19: protein translation -- Lakshmidhar and Dhruvi Sanjaykumar
Helper Student #20: symbiotic theory -- Bharat Kumar and Het Bharatbhai
Helper Question Askers

Talking Points Guide
1. Talking points were assigned in last week's class.
Each student has one assigned talking points and helper topic
At least two students will discuss each talking point.
2. If you share a talking point with a classmate:
listen to what they say
try to not repeat or duplicate what they said
90 seconds may seem short, but it's enough for meaningful content
3. Contributing to someone else gets you more discussion marks
Commenting on someone else's topic can also earn you extra points.
Asking questions of other students gets you discussion marks as well

Talking Points Guide
Edit and update your slide before presenting.
You must add visuals and pictures to the slide
Your slide should have minimal text; let your talk convey the message.
Prepare for a 60-90 second talk on each of your assigned talking points.
Clarify what the talking point is.
Explain its relevance to biotechnology.
Offer a recent example from the field of biotechnology.
Be original in your approach.
Use various online resources for your research, not just the textbook.
Offer your unique perspective.
Put into your own words
summarize your notes in your own words
reading is fine but avoid direct quotations.
No direct quoting of an article, wikipedia or the textbook
Keep jargon to a minimum for broader understanding.

Chapter 1

#1 Ancient Biotechnology  - Qazi
Early biotech contributions, key historical milestones and evolution

#1 Ancient Biotechnology - Lakshmidhar 
Earliest discovery and identification of civilizations of biotechnology and early biotech contribute to the modern world.

#2 Bacteriocins - Misbah
Fun Facts:
Unlike antibiotics, bacteriocins can be attached anywhere on the outer member due not having specific receptors. 
First discovered in 1925. 
Methods of killing include: pore-forming, nuclease activity, peptidoglycan production inhibition.
GREAT
SLIDE

#2 Bacteriocins - Srilatha
What are bacteriocins? How are bacteriocins produced?
How do bacteria use bacteriocins?
What are the mechanisms of action for different bacteriocins? 
How can bacteriocins be applied in medicine? How do bacteriocins relate to antibiotic resistance?
Are there any commercial products that utilize bacteriocins?

Model Organisms

#3 Overview of Model Organisms - Kamalpreet
MICE

Crucial - Model organisms provide valuable insights into biological systems at the cellular, tissue, organ, and systemic levels & used to examine possible causes and treatments for human and animal illnesses 
Chosen - several traits like easy maintenance, their rapid breeding cycles, their Ability to Create genetic diversity, size, generation time, accessibility, Accessibility, manageability, genetic characteristics, and potential economic benefit are considered while choosing model organisms.
Good Model Organism - A suitable model organism should be readily accessible in the ecosystem
Advantages and Limitations 
No ethical problems/no restrictions according to animal protection laws Whereas Brain anatomy, cardiovascular system and respiration systems differs substantially from humans
Easy and cheap to maintain in large quantities, time, and cost-effective handling Whereas No easy measure of complex behaviour
Short generation time (~10 days), short life span (2–3 month) - > easy to use for screens Whereas Maintenance as living cultures only, no permanent conservation (e.g., frozen stocks) possible


YEAST 
Why are model organisms crucial for biotechnology research?
How are model organisms chosen? What makes a good model organism?
What are the advantages and limitations of using model organisms?
How do model organisms contribute to our understanding of biotechnology?
How have model organisms been instrumental in the development of biotechnologies?
What is the concept of "phenotypic plasticity" in model organisms? What is the concept of "orthologs" in the study of model organisms?

#3 Overview of Model Organisms - Rudra
Model organisms can be used to create highly detailed genetic maps: Genetic maps are a visual representation of the location of different genes on a chromosome.
- A model organism is a non-human species that is studied to understand specific biological phenomena with the expectation that investigations made in the organism model will provide insight into the workings of other organisms.
- An individual genetic makeup can yield diverse phenotypes in varying environments, and this fundamental characteristic of organisms is referred to as phenotypic plasticity.
- non-human model organisms used for deeper understanding of human biology. But it is costly, time-consuming and increasingly raises ethical concerns
developed Orthologous Matrix and Alternative Model Organism (OMAMO) - provides the user with the best non-complex organism for research. The outputs provided by OMAMO were supported by a systematic literature review.
DROSOPHILA 

#4 Model Organism: Escherichia coli - Kushil
E. coli are bacteria found in the intestines of people and animals and in the environment and  They can also be found in food and untreated water.
it’s size approximately 1.0-2.0 micrometers long as well as it’s general time is 12 to 24 hours or sometimes may be more
E coli can survive outside the body from hours to months. It can live in soil for about 130 days.
the first used of ecoli bacteria in 1885
Escherichia coli is a rod-shaped (bacillus) Gram-negative bacterium that is frequently used as a model organism. Factors such as its ability to grow fast using cheap media and availability of molecular tools to perform genetic manipulations are favorable for using E. coli as a model organism in molecular genetics. 
The human genome is thought to contain approximately 100,000 genes—only about 25 times more than E. coli has.
E coli bacteria is important for digestive system and protect us to other microbials.

#4 Model Organism: Escherichia coli - Justin




In 1885 by Theordor Escherich
In water, environment, intestines of humans or animals. Rod -shaped 1.5µm long,radius 0.5µm
Can divide in lab every 20 min under aerobic, nutrient rich  conditions
Can survive outside the body from hours to months; can live in the soil for about 130 days; can survive in river water for 27 days and in cattle
Grow fast using cheap media and can be genetically modified 
Human has 25 time more genome
 Monitor water and food safety, produce cancer fighting drugs, manufacture insulin and antibiotics.
the ethical issue here can be use of e. coli for potential ecological et environmental harm, interfering with nature or create bacteriological weapons .
It’s keep in a cell lab, for a long-term storage, e. coli is diluted in 30% glycerol and frozen at −80°C they are grown in a rich liquid broth medium 



#5 Model Organism: Saccharomyces cerevisiae - Jinal
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7099199/
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S096399691930465X
GREAT
SLIDE

#5 Model Organism: Saccharomyces cerevisiae - Mitkumar
Used for wine making, baking and brewing since ancient time
Use for produce CO2 and Alcohol

Maintain in lab by cool temperature like as -20°C
Use for experiment in petry dish
GREAT
SLIDE
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?

Sydney Brenner founded in 1960s

Low Cost!
#6 Model Organism: Caenorhabditis elegans - Sienna
Location: Soil
Average Size: 1.5mm long adult
Lifespan: 3 day life cycle - 12 to 18 days
aka the Roundworm
Easy to manipulate
83% homologous to human genome
self fertilizing
1974: Identifications of mutations
1983: Apoptosis development
1998: RNAi
GREAT
SLIDE
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK20086/
https://www.google.com/url?q=https://cdn.the-scientist.com/assets/articleNo/68510/aImg/41453/c-elegans-article-l.jpg&sa=D&source=editors&ust=1694093858357466&usg=AOvVaw2SpV0nyym6V7rY_KVF3ahZ
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK20213/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4719766/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK20086/
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC310876/
https://www.google.com/url?q=https://cdn.the-scientist.com/assets/articleNo/68510/aImg/41453/c-elegans-article-l.jpg&sa=D&source=editors&ust=1694093858357466&usg=AOvVaw2SpV0nyym6V7rY_KVF3ahZ
https://cdn.the-scientist.com/assets/articleNo/68510/aImg/41453/c-elegans-article-l.jpg
https://images.nature.com/original/magazine-assets/d41586-019-01192-9/d41586-019-01192-9_16649026.jpg
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK20086/



You must add visuals and pictures to the slide
Your slide should have minimal text; let your talk convey the message.
Prepare for a 60-90 second talk on each of your assigned talking points.
Clarify what the talking point is.
Explain its relevance to biotechnology.
Offer a recent example from the field of biotechnology.
Be original in your approach.
Use various online resources for your research, not just the textbook.
Offer your unique perspective.



#6 Model Organism: Caenorhabditis elegans - Therese
Common name: “the worm” or roundworm
Size: ~1 mm
Generation time: ~3 days
Lifespan: ~2.5 weeks
Location: E. coli food source (lab), terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems as nematodes
1963 - Sydney Brenner
Nobel Prizes - 2002, 2006, 2008
**Model organism for genetic analysis
Easily manipulated
Maintained best at 37 degrees Celsius
Genetically sequence the human genome
Transparency leads to economic benefit in research
Unknown ecological importance
Investigation in human disease gene functions
GREAT
SLIDE

#7 Model Organism: Drosophila melanogaster - Freny
D.melanogaster
Common name: Fruit fly
Size: 2-3mm (female larger than male)
Lifespan: median 80 days to maximum 100 days
Life cycle: 10-12days
Location: found in the oriental region of the world. In other words, India and southeast Asia.
Genetics:
allows the most sophisticated genetic manipulations of all higher eukaryotes.
nearly 75 percent of genes that cause disease in humans are also found in fruit flies
Low cost, rapid generation 
Biotech history:
since the early 20th century, with Thomas Hunt Morgan pioneering its use in genetics studies around 1910.
Drosophila is primarily used as a model organism in genetics and developmental biology research.
Drosophila has played a significant role in understanding genetic and molecular mechanisms underlying various diseases.
Drosophila is crucial in advancing our understanding of fundamental biological processes, including genetics, development, and behavior.
Landmark:
Thomas Hunt Morgan's White Eye Mutation: In the early 20th century, Morgan used Drosophila to demonstrate that genes are located on chromosomes.
Ethical Considerations:small size, short lifespan, and limited cognitive abilities








#7 Model Organism: Drosophila melanogaster - Dhruvi 
 D.melanogaster
Common name: Fruit fly
Size: 2-3mm (female larger than male)
Lifespan: median 80 days to maximum 100 days
Life cycle: 10-12days
Location:near unripe & rotted fruits


Genetics:
Easy to manipulate
Cost effective
Rapid reproductive cycle
Close between human and fruit fly genome

Biotech history:
Father of Drosophila research - Thomas Hunt Morgan 
Model organism in genomics
Diverse branches of research

Landmark:
Thomas Hunt Morgan's White Eye Mutation








GREAT
SLIDE

#8 Model Organism: Arabidopsis thaliana - Veronica Gore
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?

#9 Model Organism: Danio rerio - Alfredo
Common name: Zebrafish
Location: Freshwater around Southern Asia
Size: ~ 0.7 - 1.5 in. (1.7 -3.8 cm)
Gen. Time: 2 - 4 months
Lifespan: ~ 3 yrs avg. / 5 yrs max
Genetic Manipulation:
Externally laid / fertilized embryos
Transgenic vs Knockout
Potential Economic Benefit:
More affordable husbandry
Small size / cheaper
Testing time 
Testing material

Biotech History:
First used in 1972 by George Streisinger
Impact:
Drug Discovery
Cardiology Research
Cancer Research
Toxicology and Environmental Health
Landmarks:
Zebrafish genome project (2001)
Heart failure research (Present)
Genetic, molecular, & cellular mechanisms of developmental processes (2002)
GREAT
SLIDE
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?

#9 Model Organism: Danio rerio - Jackie
Common Name: Zebrafish
Location: East India, Burma → Aquarium fish
Size: About 1 inch
Generation Time: 3 months 
Lifespan: 5 years in aquariums
History in Biotech Use:
Publications about 100 years ago, but Straisinger began using  it in the 1970s - early 1980s
Molecular genetics of embryonic development
Tumor angiogenesis → Chemical discovery, gene targeting
Apoptotic cell death
Regenerative tissues
Drug toxicity
Genome & Manipulation:
25 chromosomes
70% of human genes have zebrafish orthologs
Each cell can be colored with fluorescent genes
Permeability of embryos
Completely sequenced genome, easy for genetic tagging and manipulation

Economic Benefits: Easy to keep and breed in captivity, prolific, yet cheap to buy and maintain, cheaper and faster than mice or frogs
Landmark Studies
(2001 - 2013) | Zebra Genome Project
(2005) Keith Cheng | Clone of slc24a5
(2011) Leonard Zon | Leflunomide & melanoma
(2008) RPS19 | Diamond-Blackfin anemia
 (2016) Skinbow | Skin Healing (Below)

Maintenance & Culture in Lab: Small, social fish
Eggs take 3 months to develop into adults, laid in clutches of 200, develop outside of mother’s body
GREAT
SLIDE

#10 Model Organism: Mus musculus - Rutvi 
Common name - House mouse or Laboratory mouse 
Size - 160-200 mm
Generation time - 9 to 11 weeks 
Lifespan - 12 - 18 months 

Potential economic benefit - 
Development of genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs). 
Biomedical research 
Vaccine development 
Study human diseases 
Manipulating mice genetically - 
Knockout mice
Transgenic mice 
CSISPR 

GREAT
SLIDE

#10 Model Organism: Mus musculus - Erick 
First used widely in early 1900s (used by Mendel)
Animal ethics concerns
Involved in aging, immunology, and neurological studies
Kept in plastic cages where breeding happens
Embryos studied for genetic manipulation
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?

#11 Model Organism: Xenopus laevis - Hiba
Common name: African Clawed Frog 
Location: South Africa 
Size: 45.6 mm to 97.5 mm (males), 57mm to 147 mm(females)
Generation time: 1-2 years 
Lifespan: upto 15 years!
Fun Fact: Tetraploidy
Easily Genetically manipulated…
Knock- down/ knock-out
TALENs
Crispr/cas
Economical benefits
Advancement in human disease research 
Cost efficient 
High reproduction
Small size 
They share 79% of disease genes with humans:
Model human disease
Developmental biology   
GREAT
SLIDE
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?


#11 Model Organism: Xenopus laevis - Mirajsinh
Biotech history
They first gained scientific attention in 20th century
Uses
Developmental Biology               
Genetics
Toxicology
Cancer research
Immunology 
Drug discovery                                                                                    
Role in disease
Biomedicine
Microbiome Research
Disease Modeling
Importance
External Fertilization
Swift Embryonic Development
Genetic Similarities to Humans
Genetic Research









Landmark studies
Nobel prize 1995- The discovery of cyclins 
Nobel prize 2004- The discovery olfactory receptors

Ethical consideration
Treated
Welfare 
Conservation

Maintenance 
and culture


GREAT
SLIDE
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?



#12 Model Organism: Rhesus macaque - Pegah
State common name: Monkey 
Location: They are ranged from Afghanistan to the Pacific coast of China
Size:
 Male : Average Height 1.7 ft (53 cm) and weigh, on average, 17 lb (7.70 kg)
 Females:  Average height of 1.5 ft (47 cm) and an average weight of 11.8 lb (5.34 kg)
Generation time: 6 to 8 Up to 11
Lifespan: 25 years to 30 years in the wild , and in captivity 20-40 years old
How easy is it to manipulate genetically? It's never easy to manipulate the genes and needs education 
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
One of the closest 
93-95% similarity with the human genome. 
What is its potential economic benefit?
reducing healthcare costs
prevent outbreaks 
GREAT
SLIDE

#12 Model Organism: Rhesus macaque - Uzma
First used in: Carnegie Science Institute in the 1920’s 
IMPORTANT 
 transplantation techniques, 
the role of the Rhesus-factor in blood transfusions, 
development of in-vitro fertilisation techniques, 
And now it is most COMMONLY used for: 
infection research and drug development
landmark studies include research regarding COVID-19:
All leading Covid-19 vaccine candidates (Moderna, Oxford/AstraZeneca, Pfizer/BioNTech, J&J) used rhesus macaques during preclinical testing.
brain research
landmark studies include potential treatment for parkinsons disease (2020)
created an oxygen-free formulation of dopamine and infused it into the brain of monkeys, which showed an improvement in their motor symptoms.
Ethical considerations:
Monkey’s do not have autonomy or awareness BUT 
can be trained to cooperate with being handled 
 situations can become less stressful for them 



Analogy of machine lasting long if it is maintained prop but not used however with animals it needs to use its functions to survive  
because they are valuable 
there has been increased amount of attention to the housing and care of monkeys in laboratories

allowed for advances in transplantation techniques, the role of the Rhesus-factor in blood transfusions, development of in-vitro fertilisation techniques, and advances in stem cell development.




#13 Heterochromia iridum - Steve
What is heterochromia iridum?
Definition: Varied iris coloration in an individual's eyes.
What is the underlying mechanism that causes heterochromia iridum? 
Mechanism: Determined by melanin concentration and distribution.
What are the genetic and environmental factors that can cause heterochromia?
Causes:
Genetic: E.g., Waardenburg syndrome.
Acquired: Injuries, diseases, medications, surgeries.
Is heterochromia iridum observed in species other than humans?
In Animals: Observed in cats (e.g., Turkish Van), dogs (e.g., Huskies), and horses.
What are some other phenotypes or disorders in humans similar to heterochromia iridum?
Types: Sectoral, Central.
Related Conditions: Aniridia, Polycoria, Coloboma, Anisocoria.


#13 Heterochromia iridum - Jannela
Presence of different colored irises.
Complete, Partial/ Sectoral, Central
Complete eye exam to diagnose
Causes 
Hereditary, Trauma, Symptom to a disease
Genetic Factors
most cases it occurs sporadically
Environmental Factors 
Eye injury, Surgery, Use of Latisse
Observed in other species
Common in dogs and cats
Similar Phenotypes & Disorders 
Ocular Albinism, Iris Nevi, Waardenburg Syndrome
Biotechnology Relevance 
Precursor to investigate chronic diseases through gene sequencing identification 
Source: 
        https://dnatesting.com/dna-and-heterochromia-two-different-colored-eyes/
         Turbert, D. (2021, April 19). Heterochromia. American Academy of Ophthalmology. https://www.aao.org/eye-health/diseases/what-is-heterochromia 
F. Herbert Haessler, F. H. (1929, September 1). Heterochromia Irides. Archives of Ophthalmology.   https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamaophthalmology/article-abstract/608115#:~:text=The%20first%20recorded%20observation%20was,in%201843%2C%20described%20two%20cases.
Heterochromia. Mount Sinai Health System. (n.d.). https://www.mountsinai.org/health-library/symptoms/heterochromia#:~:text=A%20complete%20eye%20exam%20can,done%20to%20confirm%20the%20diagnosis. 


#14 Bacteriophage - Bhargavi
    Antibiotic :
Kills bacterial infection.
Kills good bacteria of host too.

    Antibiotic resistance bacteria :
Protect themselves by antibiotic resistance gene.              
Overuse of Antibiotics - Increase replication of Antibiotic resistance bacteria.

    Bacteriophage : 
Bacterial virus available everywhere like other bacteria and virus.
Alternative of Antibiotics.
Can not harm human healthy bacteria.
Recognise specific virus and kill them.

    Staphylococcal Bacteriophage :
Fight against staphylococcus aureus pathogen.
S.aureus develop antibiotic resistance by overuse of antibiotic.
How are bacteriophages and viruses used in biotechnology? 
Are there bacteriophages that can target antibiotic-resistant bacteria?
How have phage therapies advanced over the years? 
What are the limitations of using bacteriophage to treat infections?
What are some challenges in scaling up phage therapies?

#14 Bacteriophage - Nirali


                          
How are bacteriophages and viruses used in biotechnology? 
Are there bacteriophages that can target antibiotic-resistant bacteria?
How have phage therapies advanced over the years? 
What are the limitations of using bacteriophage to treat infections?
What are some challenges in scaling up phage therapies?

#15 Animal Cell Culture - Sonia
Animal Cell Culture = cells are taken from a living organism (in vivo) and grown/preserved in artificial environments (in vitro).


\




How are stem cells used? 
Regenerative Medicine, Bone Marrow Transplant, Tissue Engineering, Drug Testing and Development, Studying Diseases, Injury Treatment, Corneal Transplants, Neurological Conditions, Cosmetic Procedures
Model cell lines from humans, insects, and other animals. 
Human Cell lines: HeLa cells (1951), Hek 293 cells, Jurkat cells, MCF-7 cells
Insect Cell lines: Sf9 cells, Drosophila S2 cells
Other animals: CHO cells, NIH/3T3 cells, MDCK cells, Vero cells, COS-7 cells
Biotech News
Published in Developmental Cell, August 30, 2023: Researchers identified stem cells for the human thymus for the first time – will benefit immune diseases and cancer research!
https://www.healthcare.nikon.com/en/ss/cell-image-lab/knowledge/process.html
GREAT
SLIDE

#15 Animal Cell Culture - Bharat

#16 Subviral Infectious Agents - Jocelyn
Gene Creatures - genetic entities aka subviral infectious agents which include:

Evolutionary Trajectory impact of host organisms





Satellite Viruses
Plasmids
Transposons
Biotechnological applications: 
Generally allow for genome manipulation of model organisms 
Viruses are used in gene therapy + foreign DNA injection into host cells
Transposons used to deliver genes in host DNA

Contain helpful genetic elements 
Antibiotic resistance genes
Antibacterial enzymes
Virulence
Provide new food sources for host 
Transfer genetic material

GREAT
SLIDE

#16 Subviral Infectious Agents - Sowmya
Transposons are indeed often referred to as "jumping genes.Almost half of our DNA sequences are made up of jumping genes—also known as transposons. They jump around the genome in developing sperm and egg cells and are important to evolution. But their mobilization can also cause new mutations that lead to diseases, such as hemophilia and cancer.Advantages: 1. Genetic Diversity 2. Evolutionary innovation 3. Rapid evolution 4. Repair Mechanism Disadvantages: 1. Mutational load 2. Genomic 3 Instability 3. Genome size expansion 4.Regulatory Interference 5. Horizontal Gene Transfer
*Polintons, also known as Mavericks, are a class of mobile genetic elements found in some archaea, bacteria, and eukaryotes. 1.Complex Structures 2.Complex Structure 3.Large Size 4.Endosymbiotic Origin 5.Variable Distribution 6. Role in evolution
How do gene creatures impact the evolutionary trajectory of their host organisms?
Besides satellite viruses and plasmids, are there other types of genetic entities that qualify as gene creatures?
How might gene creatures be harnessed for biotechnological applications?
Transposons are often called "jumping genes." What are the evolutionary advantages and disadvantages of having these transposons within a genome?
What are Polintons, and how do they differ from other types of mobile genetic elements?
What are virophages such as Sputnik and Zamilon, and could they be engineered to combat human viral infections?

Chapter 2

Prokaryotic transcription - Het
Roles of Sigma Factors : Promoter,Formation,Initiation,Gene Expression Regulations & Switching
Roles of Operons :
Coordinate Genes
Transcriptional Control
Operator & Repressor Proteins
Environmental Adaptation 
Affected by Environmental Factors
Temperature, Oxygen,
PH,Osmotic Stress
Toxins,Quorum Sensing
Environmental Signals
Stress Responses
                                                                                                                                                                        Diagram of Plasmid>>>




GREAT
SLIDE

#17 Prokaryotic transcription - Serene





Bacterial plasmids transfer information from one cell to another

Sigma factors in prokaryotes function in the initiation of transcription

E. Coli is one of the most widely used bacterium for research 


 Operons are complexes that regulate gene expression 

Prokaryotes respond to environmental changes in food availability, pH, temperature, etc. by altering their gene expression pattern 

Sigma factors, operons, environment, e coli, plasmids 

#18 EUKARYOTIC TRANSCRIPTION - HARNISH
Difference between Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Gene expression:
1–Compartmentalization
2–Genome Complexity
3–Regulatory Complexity & Post-Transcriptional Modifications  
    Capping on 5’ end, Splicing of introns, Polyadenylation at 3’ end
Alternative Splicing: a unique feature of eukaryotic mRNA processing that
 enhances the diversity of protein isoforms produced from a single gene.
Epigenetic modifications 
DNA Methylation:
Histone Modifications:
Chromatin Remodeling:
Non-Coding RNAs:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 


#18 Eukaryotic transcription - Disha
I
What makes eukaryotic cells more complicated to work with in biotechnology compared to prokaryotic cells?
How does transcription regulation in eukaryotes differ from that in prokaryotes? What role do transcription factors play in eukaryotic cells?
What are the key steps in eukaryotic mRNA processing, and how do they differ from prokaryotes? What is the process of alternative splicing?
How does epigenetic modification regulate gene expression in eukaryotic cells?

#19 Protein Translation - Mansi
Protein Translation and the steps involved
The Protein translation is the process in living cells in which proteins are produced 
using RNA molecules as templates.
The main steps in translation are :
1.Initiation
2.Elongation
3.Termination
Differ Protein synthesis in Eukaryotes and Prokaryotes
Prokaryotes can translate mRNA into proteins while the DNA is being transcribed.Prokaryotic protein synthesis can be fairly fast because one gene can be transcribed and translated simultaneously
Eukaryotes must end transcription of given segment, send it out of nucelus and only then translate it. Eukaryotic synthesis is slower, but more precious
post-translational modification
Post-translational modification can occur at any step in the "life cycle" of a protein


Discuss protein translation, including the steps involved and the roles of various translation factors. 
How does protein synthesis in eukaryotes differ from that in prokaryotes, and what are the implications for biotech?
How does post-translational modification occur?
What are some methods for studying translation in real-time?

#19 Protein Translation - Anjali
The process by which a protein is synthesized from the information contained in molecule of messenger RNA
Peptidyl transferase is the main enzyme used in protein translation
Step involved in protein translation
1)Initiation:- by initiation factors IF1,IF2,IF3 including mRNA, ribosomes, tRNA 
2)Elongation:-by three protein factors EF-TU,EF-TS,EF-G
3)Termination:-triggered by three stop codons UAA,UAG & UGA
*protein translation is done in eukaryotes involving 40s and 60s subunits
                                                        Prokaryotes involves 70s ribosomes 
Discuss protein translation, including the steps involved and the roles of various translation factors. 
How does protein synthesis in eukaryotes differ from that in prokaryotes, and what are the implications for biotech?


How does post-translational modification occur?
What are some methods for studying translation in real-time?

#20 Symbiotic theory - Veronica Leavy
Discuss the symbiotic theory for chloroplasts and mitochondria. 
Explain differences to the central dogma in these symbiotic organelles. 
What is the evidence supporting the symbiotic theory? What are some arguments against the symbiotic theory?
How have mitochondria and chloroplasts been utilized in biotechnological applications?

#20 Symbiotic theory - Shubham
What is the definition of the symbiotic theory?
Eukaryotic cells may have evolved when multiple cells joined together into one. They began to live in what we call symbiotic relationships.The theory that explains how this could have happened is called endosymbiotic theory. An endosymbiont is one organism that lives inside of another one.   
What is the evidence supporting the symbiotic theory ?
Bacteria, a prokaryote has circular DNA as do mitochondria and chloroplasts. This provides support for the symbiotic theory, which states that the mitochondria and chloroplast in eukaryotic cells were once aerobic bacteria (prokaryote) that were ingested by a large anaerobic bacteria (prokaryote).                                                                                                                                          Both contain circular DNA, ribosomes, and a double membrane
(1)Membranes & DNA (2) Reproduction (3) Use 







Best Slide Award
GREAT
SLIDE
GREAT
SLIDE
GREAT
SLIDE

The End
