Set #1
Talking Points
Sept 8, 2022

Assigned Talking Points
Talking Point #1: ancient biotech -- Kimberly, Brianna, Rawan
Talking Point #2: bacteriocins -- Laura, Rikita, Eunice
Talking Point #3: e. coli -- Rawan, Osbaldo, Eunice
Talking Point #4: yeast -- Dlen, Sonia, Laura
Talking Point #5: c. elegans -- Sonia, Tania, 
Talking Point #6: drosophila -- Kher, Nathi, 
Talking Point #7: arabidopsis -- Kher, , 
Talking Point #8: zebrafish -- Hammad, Christine, Audrey
Talking Point #9: mice -- Rikita, Meaghan, 
Talking Point #10: frogs -- Nathi, Audrey, 
Talking Point #11: heterochromia -- Ethan, Dlen, 
Talking Point #12: viruses -- Brianna, Ethan, 
Talking Point #13: cell culture -- Tania, Kimberly, 
Talking Point #14: transcription -- Deena, Hammad, Shahd
Talking Point #15: translation -- Osbaldo, Christine, 
Talking Point #16: symbiotic theory -- Meaghan, Deena, Shahd

Talking Points Guide

Talking Points Guide
Talking points were assigned during last week’s class
Each student was assigned to two talking points.
Each talking point will have at least two students talking about it
If you share a talking point with another student:
listen to what they say
try to not repeat or duplicate what they said
90 seconds of content is not much content!
Contributing gets you more discussion points
If you have something interesting to say about someone else's talking you can score some extra points.
Asking questions of other students gets you discussion marks as well

Talking Points Guide
Edit and update your slide
Add several pictures and some text
It is best to have as few words as possible on your slide -- you do the talking not your slide
Be prepared to give a 60-90 second presentation about each of your assigned talking point
define the talking point, describe its relation to biotechnology, or provide a recent example of the talking point in biotechnology news
Try to be unique
Don’t just copy the book, use the internet for research. 
Provide your own perspective
Please put into your own words
It is okay if you read your notes, but put notes in your own words
No direct quoting of an article, wikipedia or the textbook
Minimize jargon

Chapter 1

#1 Kimberly  
1. What are the first biotechnology discoveries? How did early biotech create the modern world?
Selective breeding in plants
Fermentation
2. How did early biotech create the modern world?
Allows us to have good food!
Allowed us to have good food!

#1 Brianna  
The creation of the smallpox vaccination 



The first ever centrifuge was created to be used to separate cream from milk
The creation of vaccines has lead to a plethora of vaccinations that are given to children and adults
For example: shingles, flu, MMR, and the new Covid-19 vaccine 
Centrifuges play a huge role in the modern world today for example it can be used to separate components of blood and it is still used to separate cream from milk 
1. What are the first biotechnology discoveries? How did early biotech create the modern world?

#1  Rawan
Paving the path for modern biotechnology
1. What are the first biotechnology discoveries? How did early biotech create the modern world?

#2 Laura

 
2. What are Bacteriocins? How do bacteria use them? How can we use them in medicine?

-Bacteriocins are produced by certain bacteria in order to kill other closely related strains of the same bacterial species 
-Potential alternatives to traditional antibiotics. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/immunology-and-microbiology/colicin-factor

#2 Rikita 
2. What are Bacteriocins? How do bacteria use them? How can we use them in medicine?
~Bacteriocins are peptidic toxins produced by bacteria to inhibit the growth of similar bacteria strain. 
~The purpose of using bacteriocins to kill bacteria and it develop antibiotics.
Image: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41579-021-00569-w


#2 Iqbal
2. What are Bacteriocins? How do bacteria use them? How can we use them in medicine?

Model Organisms

Model Organism: Escherichia coli - Rawan
Escherichia Coli, also known as E. Coli 
Location: intestine of organisms or environment
Size: 2 micrometers long and 0.25-1 micrometer diameter
Generation time: 15- 20 mins in lab, 12-24hrs in organism
Frequently used as a model organism; “flexible genome” 
First used in biotechnology: 1973
biotech history: year first used, what is it used for, role in disease, why it is important, etc.


Model Organism: Escherichia coli - Osbaldo
Escherichia Coli
Gram negative (stains pink)
facultative anaerobe
Rod- shaped



Genetics
Easy to manipulate
Has been used to manufacture drugs
25 times less genes than humans
Has outer membrane with thin petidoglycan layer
Does not retain crystal violet stain
Can use oxygen (aerobic respiration)
Can survive without (fermentation)
insulin and antibiotics and some use for cancer drugs. 
Genome 25 times less Bacteriophage used to “splice” genome to manipulate bacterium.

Model Organism: Escherichia coli - Iqbal
For the model organism above, state common name, location, size, generation time, live span, how easy to manipulate, genetics, how similar to human, potential economic benefit, biotech history: year first used, what is it used for, role in disease, why it is important, etc.

Model Organism: Saccharomyces cerevisiae - Dlen
Common name: yeast
Location: unicellular fungus
Size: genome contains about 6000 genes.
Genetics: genomic DNA of 12068 kilobases arranged in 16 Chromosomes
Biotech history: 1857 fermentation discovered by Louis Pasteur.
Fermentation capacity, resilient to unfavorable conditions of low pH as well as osmolarity, and production of alcohol and CO2.  
Parapouli, M., Vasileiadis, A., Afendra, A. S., & Hatziloukas, E. (2020). Saccharomyces cerevisiaeand its industrial applications. AIMS microbiology, 6(1), 1–31. 
https://doi.org/10.3934/microbiol.2020001
https://www.lesaffre.com/trends-mag/introducing-saccharomyces-cerevisiae/
https://www.researchgate.net/figure/A-Budding-yeast-Saccharomyces-cerevisiae-13-and-B-cycle-of-sexual-and-vegetative_fig1_335548216
https://www.exploreyeast.com/what-is-yeast/yeast-one-of-humankinds-oldest-ingredients/


Model Organism: Saccharomyces cerevisiae - Sonia
Common name: baker’s yeast
Location: found in fruits and insects
Size: 5-10 micrometer in diameter
Biotech: brewing and bread making
Unique genetic material and Protein expression.



Model Organism: Saccharomyces cerevisiae - Laura
-Easy to cultivate
-Engineered cell factories
-Ability to modify genome 
-Human disease studies in yeast
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpls.2021.719148/full
https://www.synthego.com/blog/crispr-yeast

Model Organism: Caenorhabditis elegans - Sonia
Common name: Roundworm
Location: soil environments more specifically rotting vegetation
Size: 1 mm in length
Life Span: 18-20 days
In 1964 a scientist named Sydney Brenner used C. elegans as a model organism in order to study animal development and behavior.
C. elegans have similar tissues that are very similar to humans.
Current research aims to understand the molecular mechanism of neurodegenerative disorders (stroke, ischemia, and aging) and identify targets and drugs for therapeutic interventions. 

Model Organism: Caenorhabditis elegans - Tania
For the model organism above, state common name, location, size, generation time, live span, how easy to manipulate, genetics, how similar to human, potential economic benefit, biotech history: year first used, what is it used for, role in disease, why it is important, etc.
Small roundworm (~ 1 mm)
Soil of rotting vegetation
3 day generation time, lifespan of about 2 weeks
Hermaphrodite and male  
Small genome
Advantages
Transparent 
Life cycle
Physiological characteristics 
Nerve, digestive, & reproductive systems
History
First used in 1960s, for study of behavior and development
Now: studies on aging, genetics, metabolism, etc. 
Importance 
https://www.wormatlas.org/hermaphrodite/introduction/mainframe.htm
https://www.leica-microsystems.com/science-lab/work-efficiently-in-developmental-biology-with-stereo-and-confocal-microscopy-c-elegans/
Zhang, Siwen et al. "Caenorhabditis Elegans As A Useful Model For Studying Aging Mutations". Frontiers In Endocrinology, vol 11, 2020. Frontiers Media SA, https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2020.554994. Accessed 6 Sept 2022. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fendo.2020.554994/full#:~:text=Adult%20C.,C%20(4%E2%80%937).  

Clark, David P, and Nanette J Pazdernik. Biotechnology. 2nd ed., Academic Cell, 2016, p. 16.
Cite this Page
Close
Riddle DL, Blumenthal T, Meyer BJ, et al., editors. C. elegans II. 2nd edition. Cold Spring Harbor (NY): Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 1997. Section I, The Biological Model. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK20086/





Model Organism: Drosophila melanogaster - Kher
D. melanogaster
Commonly known as the fruit fly
2-3mm in size (females larger than males)
Lifespan of ~50 days (egg to death)
Life cycle of 10-12 days at 25°C
Benefits as a model organism
Well-characterized genome 
4 chromosomes
15,000 genes
Rapid reproduction cycle
Cost-effective 
Close similarity between fruit fly and human genes 
75% human disease-causing genes found in fruit flies
Research used in 
Genetics (first discovered)
Neuroscience and neurodevelopment
Microbial/immunological pathogenesis
Thomas Hunt Morgan - "discovery of X-linked phenomenon in Drosophila" at Columbia University in 1910

Model Organism: Drosophila melanogaster - Nathi
Common name: Fruit Fly
Location: Wide range of habitats, more species in the tropical regions
Size: Females are about 2.5 mm long; males are slightly smaller
Generation time: Varies with temperature, the shortest development time (egg to adult) is 7 days 
Life span: 2-3 months (short life span)

Genetics: 
Has only 4 pairs of chromosomes compared to 23 in humans. Easy to study the mapped genes. 
Similarity: 75 % of the genes that cause disease in the human population are homologous in fruit flies.
Economic benefit: low cost, rapid generation and widely used in scientific research 

Biotech history: 
Father of Drosophila research - Thomas Hunt Morgan 
1920s - Muller discovered that x-rays caused mutation in genes, and could actually break chromosomes.
Used in a diverse range of biological processes: 
Genetics and inheritance
Embryonic development
Learning and behavior

Most studied organism in genetics research
Thomas Hunt Morgan - define genes and establish that they were found within chromosomes. 


https://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/fruit_fly#Drosophilia_melanogaster
https://animaldiversity.org/accounts/Drosophila_melanogaster/
https://elifesciences.org/articles/06793


Model Organism: Arabidopsis thaliana - Kher
A. thaliana
Commonly known as a the mouse-ear cress/thale cress
Small flowering plant (20-25 cm)
Short life cycle (6 weeks)
Discovered by Johannes Thal in the Harz mountains in the 16th century

Benefits as a model organism
Well-studied (1st plant genome sequenced)
Relative small diploid genome (recessive mutations)
Fully sequenced genome
5 chromosomes
20,000 genes
Cost-effective (1 plant yields thousands of seeds)

Research used in 
Plant development (light sensing, flowering)
Genetics (genetic mapping and sequencing)
Epigenetics
1st mutant in A. thaliana documented in 1873 by Alexander Braun - 
double flower phenotype

Model Organism: Arabidopsis thaliana - ???
For the model organism above, state common name, location, size, generation time, live span, how easy to manipulate, genetics, how similar to human, potential economic benefit, biotech history: year first used, what is it used for, role in disease, why it is important, etc.

Model Organism: Danio rerio - Hammad
Danio rerio (zebrafish).
Ø  They are commonly seen  in South Asian countries such as India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, 
and Bhutan.
Ø  The size is 2.5cm to 4cm and they usually lives for 3yrs.
 
Biotech History   (Genetic similarity)
Ø  Zebrafish was first used as a biological model by George Streisinger,
 in the year 1970 to study the nervous system.
Ø  They share 70% of genes with humans.
Zebrafish and humans are vertebrates and they share common features for instance- blood kidney, eyes and muscle which makes it an ideal organism for research in the Biotechnology.
 
 Benefits of Zebrafish
They are small & Robust
They are cheaper to maintain than Mice

Model Organism: Danio rerio - Christine 
For the model organism above, state common name, location, size, generation time, live span, how easy to manipulate, genetics, how similar to human, potential economic benefit, biotech history: year first used, what is it used for, role in disease, why it is important, etc.

Model Organism: Danio rerio - Audrey
Requires a clean environment with properly controlled tank
Fairly easy to handle
Transparent embryo, and fast reproduction
~ 2-4 month per generation 
Up to 200 eggs per week
Complete genome sequenced
Can repair heart muscle

Model Organism: Mus musculus - Rikita
Common Name: House Mouse
Location: Native central Asia but also spread to Europe.
Size: Total length of mouse body is 160-200 mm. Tail measures 78-94 mm, foot 17-20 mm. The average adult weight is 15-24 g.
Generation Time: Apx. 3 weeks. They mature at 6-8 weeks. Lab generation time 9-11 weeks.
Live Span: less then year when they live in the wild, because of a high level of exposure to bad environments.
How easy to manipulate: controlling Indoor mouse by using Traps. 
Genetics: 16 chromosomes is associated with thyroid function in mouse. 
How similar to human: protein regions of the mouse & human genomes are 85% identical. 
Potential economic benefit: For clinical research and it is less costly because they grow in lab. 
Biotech history: 
        year first used: early 1900s 
        what is it used for: use for clinical research. 
        role in diseases: : house mouse Carrie’s many disease and transmission directly and indirectly.
        why it is important: one of the first genetic model organisms 
Image: https://www.brodybrotherspestcontrol.com/house-mice-vs-deer-mice-maryland-homes

Model Organism: Mus musculus - Meaghan
 
Common name: House mouse
Location: Native to India but have spread to the Mediterranean and further to the rest of Europe, live in close proximity to humans 
Size: L 7.5-10 cm, TL 5-10 cm, W 40-45 g
Generation time: As early as 5 weeks (females 6 weeks, males 8 weeks)
Life span: 2-3 years 
How easy to manipulate: easy maintenance/handling, high rate of reproduction  
Genetics: 20 chromosomes in haploid genome 
Similarity to humans: High homology, share same gene functions   
Potential economic benefit: Research and consumer benefits (cost effective testing), agricultural and structural loss (damage)
Biotech history: 
Year first used: 1902 (Lathrop) 
What is it used for: Biomedical research and comparative medicine studies 
Role in disease: Can spread disease through mechanical transmission (direct), chemical transmission (indirect)
Why it is important: One of the most common model organisms, tumor biology 

Model Organism: Xenopus laevis - Nathi
Common name: African clawed Frog 
Location: Found across Africa and in some parts of the US and Europe
Size: males (45.6 to 97.5 mm) tend to be be smaller than females (57 to 147 mm)
Generation time: 1-2 years (long)
Lifespan: can live upto 20 years 

Genetics:
Most-studied species of frogs
Very similar to humans and a good model organism for human diseases
Large oocyte and embryo size
Easy genetic manipulation - Xenopus embryos develop outside the body

Biotech history: 
The eggs and embryos of X. laevis can be produced in large numbers by using hormone injection.
In the 1940s, female Xenopus laevis were commonly used in hospitals to detect pregnancy in females. 
Xenopus laevis was the first vertebrate animal to be cloned. 
Currently, used in developmental Biology, embryonic induction and biomedical research.




Upon injection of urine from a human female, the frogs start to produce eggs if hCG is detected. 


Model Organism: Xenopus laevis - Audrey
Common name: African Clawed frog
Found in Nigeria and Sudan to South Africa
Males → 45.6 to 97.5mm
Females → 57 to 147mm
Embryos develop inside the body => extremely easy to manipulate genetically
Generation time:~1-2 years
Lifespan:15-16 years
4 copies of each chromosome   
Originally used in late 1950s for pregnancy development (cHG)
High reproductive rate and intermediate host to fluke parasite
Location: Nigeria and Sudan to South Africa 
Size: Males =>45.6mm to 97.5mm   Females=>57mm to 147mm
Generation time: ~1-2 years
Lifespan:15-16 years
Xenopus females injected into the dorsal lymph sac with human urine containing human chorionic gonadotrophin respond by laying eggs the next day.


#11 Ethan 
11. How does Heterochromia iridum occur?
When you have different colored iris in the eyes
The main way of acquiring this is through genetics.
 


#11 Dlen
11. How does Heterochromia iridum occur?
Heterochromia an uncommon condition where the two eye would be different colors.
Might be at birth or occur later on.
Hereditary or Genetic abnormalities, trauma, and inflammation,
The eye which is effected is either hyperpigmented or hypopigmented.
concentration of melanin in the iris tissues.
Melanocytes cells where melanin is made.
Anything wrong with those cells in one eye leads less pigment made leading to heterochromia.
https://www.medicinenet.com/heterochromia_iridis/article.htm
Heterochromia.htm
https://www.thetech.org/ask-a-geneticist/heterochromia
https://eyelovecares.org/heterochromia/


#11 Shahd 
11. How does Heterochromia iridum occur?
Heterochromia is when a person’s irises are 2 different colors. There are 3 types.
Congenital heterochromia: an infant is born with/develops the condition after birth. Usually, no other health concerns related. 
Causes of condition in infants include diseases, i.e: 
Bourneville disease
Parry-romberg syndrome
There’s also acquired heterochromia. Causes include:
Eye injuries
Diseases (Glaucoma, diabetes, cancer)
Eye surgery 
Underlying causes are treated. Otherwise, no treatment is necessary.


https://www.aao.org/eye-health/diseases/what-is-heterochromia

#12 Brianna
How are bacteriophages used in biotech?
Can replace antibiotics when treating patients for antibiotic resistant bacteria infections 
Can create a defense mechanism which allows for better performance of antibiotics 



How are viruses used in biotech?
By removing the pathogenic part of a virus it can be used a vector in gene therapy
For example Luxturna delivers a functional copy of a gene using a virus as a vector to restore vision in patients (in the EU only)

#12 Ethan
12. How are bacteriophage and viruses used in biotech?
Bacteriophage
Using bacteriophages scientists have found that they can help underdeveloped areas to filter water
They “eat” harmful bacteria and pollutants creating a physical film to scoop out
Viruses
New cancer research has shown that it might be possible to put viral tags on cancer cells and introduce it into 


#13 Tania
13. Animal Cell Culture. What are some model cell lines from humans, insects, and other animals? How are they used? What are HeLa cells?
Model Cell lines
Cells able to grow under correct laboratory conditions
HvT1- tobacco budworm, TN368- Cabbage looper
COS- monkey kidney
HeLa cells
Another way to study physiology 
Genetic manipulation, studies on gene expression
Immortal lines that are virtually the same
HeLa Cells
Henrietta Lacks cervical cancer 
First immortal cell line 
Still used to this day 
Ethical issues surrounding medical research 
https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/henriettalacks/importance-of-hela-cell
https://www.news-medical.net/life-sciences/Why-are-Reporter-Labelled-Cell-Lines-Useful.aspx
"Guide To Research Techniques In Neuroscience.". 2010. Elsevier, https://doi.org/10.1016/c2009-0-01891-1. Accessed 6 Sept 2022.

https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/henriettalacks/importance-of-hela-cells.html 

https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-02494-z 


#13 Kimberly
13. Animal Cell Culture. What are some model cell lines from humans, insects, and other animals? How are they used? What are HeLa cells?
PDX (patient-derived xenograft)
Used to determine patient's’ plan of care
HeLa cells - the “Immortal Cell Line”
Taken without consent from Henrietta Lacks
Cervical cancer cells that survived outside the human body and continued to multiply.
Have been used to study various diseases such as HPV and Polio

Chapter 2

Transcription Deena
14. How does transcription differ in eukaryotes? 
Transcription in eukaryotes takes place in the nucleus, and then translated in the cytoplasm. In prokaryotes, it occurs in the cytoplasm. 
 RNA polymerase II transcribes all the protein coding genes
RNA polymerase I transcribes rRNA genes
RNA polymerase III transcribes rRNA, tRNA and smaller nuclear RNA genes. 



#14 Hammad


Transcription in Eukaryotes



mRNA Processing
The RNAs which are produced are processed in the Nucleus, and are complex 10 to 15 polypeptides.
During Transcription pre RNA/hnRNA is formed in the Nucleus
Then Processing starts which involves, 
 Capping at 5’ end & Poly A tail or  Polyadenylation at 3’end 
and splicing to remove the introns.

Process
Eukaryotes
Prokaryotes
Transcription 
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
Translation
Cytoplasm
Cytoplasm

#14 Shahd
Transcription is the copying of the DNA strand information into a new RNA strand. 
pre-mRNA must be processed into mRNA
A 5’ cap is added to the beginning of the RNA transcript
A 3’ poly-A tail is added to the end
Splicing occurs
Introns removed, pre-mRNA exported to cytoplasm 
Exons correspond to protein-coding sequences


Eukaryotes
Prokaryotes
Transcription: in nucleus 
In cytoplasm
Transcriptional factors needed
No proteins needed 
14. How does transcription differ in eukaryotes? How is it regulated in eukaryotes? Describe mRNA processing: what happens at the beginning, middle, and end of the pre-mRNA?


#15 Translation - Osbaldo
Protein translation: 4 steps
Activation, initiation, elongation, & termination

translation factors and their roles
Ribosomes, tRNA, mRNA
Difference between prokaryotes and eukaryotes
Different start and end  Codon’s
Shine-dalgarno sequence (prokaryotes)

Following central dogma. 5’->3’(Dna,rna, protein)
Dna ->Mrna (transcription)->proteins (translation)
Takes place on ribosomes in cell cytoplasm, Mrna read and translated into string of amino acid chains that make up synthesized protein
Activation: correct amino acid covalently bonded to correct tRNA ( amino acid joined by its cxarboxyl group to the 3’ OH of the tRNA by an ester bond) tRNA considered charged
Initiation: small subunit of ribosome binds 5’ end of mRNA
Elongation: Additional amino acids are added to chain
Termination: A site of ribosome faces stop codon
Ribosomes serve as factories in cell where information is translated from a code into functional product
mRNA is the template used by ribosomes to make proteins 
Different AUG start codons
Porkaryotes shine-dalgarno sequence start recognition
Eukaryotes mRNA contain a special structure at its 5’ end as well as capping, POlyadenylation, splicing before exported to cytoplasm



#15 Christine
15. Protein translation: steps in the process, difference between prokaryotes and eukaryotes, translation factors and their roles.

#16 Meaghan
16. Explain symbiotic theory for chloroplast and mitochondria, central dogma in these organelles.
The symbiotic theory states that some eukaryotic organelles were once prokaryotic microbes such as mitochondria and chloroplasts 
Mitochondria and Chloroplasts
Both the size of some prokaryotic microbes
Divide by binary fission 
DNA is circular not linear 
Double membranes 
The central dogma is the process by which genetic information is converted into a functional product
Genetic information only flows in one direction (DNA -> RNA -> protein)
Contain both DNA and RNA 

Symbiotic Theory Deena
16. Explain symbiotic theory for chloroplast and mitochondria, central dogma in these organelles.
Symbiotic theory: Explains where the origin of chloroplasts and mitochondria were. 
Evidence for Symbiotic theory: Both contain circular DNA, ribosomes, and a double membrane
Central dogma: 
The flow of genetic information. Goes from DNA -> RNA -> Protein.
	DNA REPLICATION, TRANSCRIPTION, TRANSLATION
DNA polymerase to RNA polymerase to Ribosome.

#16 - Shahd
16. symbiotic theory for chloroplast and mitochondria, central dogma in these organelles.
https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1KNT7DKj8ZX5Gw49aPI3UKvP60Y5uyzc7EcD_9kwm_0U/edit?usp=drive_web&ouid=104913709763368793432
