Set #1: Intro to BioTech
Talking Points
Sept 4, 2025

DO NOT CHANGE
THE THEME!!!
We are using the “Tropic” theme and that is it.

Talking Points Guide

Slides will be
locked immediately
prior to class
~5:45pm

Overall Setup of Talking Points Assignment


Talking Points Assigned
Talking points were assigned during last week’s class.
Each student was assigned to one or two talking points based on class size.
Collaboration with Classmates Expectation
Each talking point will have at least two students talking about it.
If you share a talking point with another student: Listen to what they say and do not repeat or duplicate what they said.
Engagement and Points
Keep It Concise: 60 seconds per talking point is short;
Stay on topic and be impactful.
Earn Extra Discussion Marks:
Contributing gets you more discussion points.
If you have something interesting to say about someone else’s talking point, you can score some extra points.
Asking questions of other students gets you discussion marks as well.
Use the chat for the question asking and answering

Formatting Your Talking Point Slide Before Class
Edit and update your slide
Be a Visual Storyteller – limit the amount of text – you do the talking, not your slide.
Images Are Required: Try to have several pictures on your slide to maintain audience attention. You should have some text though.
Add several pictures and some text.
Movies and animated gifs are discouraged but not forbidden.
No external audio is allowed. Movies will be muted.
Limit Text: No complete sentences on slides; use short phrases and keywords only.
Content Preparation
Define the talking point, describe its relation to biotechnology, or provide a recent example of the talking point in biotechnology news.
Try to be unique and creative with your slide’s look and content.
Don’t just copy the book; use the internet for research
Provide your own perspective.
Minimize jargon to make it accessible to all classmates.

Presenting Your Talking Point Slide During Class
Structure
Explain at the level of the class. If you have a technical term, define it. If you do not quite understand it, no one will.
You do not have enough time to cover the entire topic in 60 seconds
so choose the most interesting part or provide outside perspective
but you also need to know the entire topic if I ask questions
Presentation Delivery
Show ENTHUSIASM and make it exciting!
You will unmute to present your talking point, Video is not required
Keep Things to the Point
Do not read directly from slides
put the words you plan to speak in your notes, not the slide.
Put Into Your Own Words
It is okay if you read from notes, but put notes in your own words.
No direct quoting of an article, wikipedia or the textbook
Engagement Tips
Be prepared for questions.
Respect the time limit: If you go over, the audience stops focusing on the talk and starts watching the clock.


Student Selection

Talking Point #1: ancient biotech -- Raj
Talking Point #2: bacteriocins -- Erika and Kimberly
Talking Point #3: model organisms -- Susana and Niyati
Talking Point #4: lambda phage -- Mansi P.
Talking Point #5: TMV virus -- Gourav and Hrithik
Talking Point #6: e. coli -- Shyamani and Anudari
Talking Point #7: cyanobacteria -- Matthew
Talking Point #8: yeast -- Ashia
Talking Point #9: tetrahymena -- no one assigned
Talking Point #10: c. elegans -- Olivia
Talking Point #11: arabidopsis -- Rocelle
Talking Point #12: switchgrass -- Binay
Talking Point #13: reinhardtii -- Ananya
Talking Point #14: drosophila -- Tania
Talking Point #15: zebrafish -- Daniela N. and Shreya

Primary Presenters
Talking Point #16: axolotl -- Debbie and Kenny
Talking Point #17: frogs -- Jacky
Talking Point #18: mice -- Dhavalsinh
Talking Point #19: rat -- Pal
Talking Point #20: rabbit -- Wanqian
Talking Point #21: monkey -- Mansi V.
Talking Point #22: heterochromia -- Daniela T. and Sobia
Talking Point #23: bacteriophage -- Isabella and Diana
Talking Point #24: cell culture -- Ayesha and Marylyn
Talking Point #25: subviral agents -- Jaren
Talking Point #26: prok transcript -- Bansari
Talking Point #27: euk transcript -- no one assigned
Talking Point #28: protein translation -- Sadia
Talking Point #29: symbiotic theory -- Griffin and Owais
If you missed class, you must email me to select an available topic from the Topic Selection Google Sheet (linked on Blackboard) before you can present.

Question Asker #1: ancient biotech -- Daniela N. and Shreya
Question Asker #2: bacteriocins -- Debbie and Kenny
Question Asker #3: model organisms -- Jacky and Diana
Question Asker #4: lambda phage -- no one assigned
Question Asker #5: TMV virus -- Pal
Question Asker #6: e. coli -- Wanqian
Question Asker #7: cyanobacteria -- Mansi V.
Question Asker #8: yeast -- Daniela T. and Sobia
Question Asker #9: tetrahymena -- no one assigned
Question Asker #10: c. elegans -- Ayesha and Marylyn
Question Asker #11: arabidopsis -- Jaren
Question Asker #12: switchgrass -- Bansari
Question Asker #13: reinhardtii -- Isabella
Question Asker #14: drosophila -- Sadia
Question Asker #15: zebrafish -- Griffin and Owais

Helper Question Askers
Question Asker #16: axolotl -- Raj and Mansi P.
Question Asker #17: frogs -- Erika and Kimberly
Question Asker #18: mice -- Susana and Niyati
Question Asker #19: rat -- Binay
Question Asker #20: rabbit -- Gourav and Hrithik
Question Asker #21: monkey -- Shyamani and Anudari
Question Asker #22: heterochromia -- Matthew
Question Asker #23: bacteriophage -- Ashia
Question Asker #24: cell culture -- Dhavalsinh
Question Asker #25: subviral agents -- Olivia
Question Asker #26: prok transcript -- Rocelle
Question Asker #27: euk transcript -- no one assigned
Question Asker #28: protein translation -- Ananya
Question Asker #29: symbiotic theory -- Tania

Chapter 1

#1 Ancient Biotechnology  
What were the earliest discoveries in biotechnology?
Can you identify the civilizations that first harnessed biotechnology?
How did early biotech contribute to the modern world?
What are the key historical milestones in biotechnology?
How did biotechnology evolve from being an art to a science?

Ancient Biotechnology  - Raj“Let’s rewind history and see where biotechnology began… ⏳
1st Biotech snacks- Bread & Beer







(Ayurveda) 

(10,000 BCE – selective breeding) → 🍺 (6000 BCE – beer) → 🧪 (1800s – Pasteur) → 🧬 (1953 – DNA)
10,000BCA - Selective breeding, 6000 BCA - Beer1800s - Pasteur, 1953 - DNA


#2 Bacteriocins 
textbook has a section on this.
What are bacteriocins? How are bacteriocins produced?
How do bacteria use bacteriocins?
What are the mechanisms of action for different bacteriocins? 
How can bacteriocins be applied in medicine? How do bacteriocins relate to antibiotic resistance?
Are there any commercial products that utilize bacteriocins?


#2 Bacteriocins 
Treat Bacterial Infection
Vaccine Development
Enhance Antibiotic Effectiveness
Food Preservation 
01
02
03
04

Model Organisms

#3 Overview of Model Organisms 
Why are model organisms crucial for biotechnology research?
How are model organisms chosen? What makes a good model organism?
What are the advantages and limitations of using model organisms?
How do model organisms contribute to our understanding of biotechnology?
How have model organisms been instrumental in the development of biotechnologies?
What is the concept of "phenotypic plasticity" in model organisms? What is the concept of "orthologs" in the study of model organisms?

#Model Organisms - Susana
Importance
Ideal model
.Use to understand biological processes

.Easier to keep in a 
lab setting

.Platform use to test 
hypothesis

.Replicates complexity of a 
living organism

.Small size
.Breeding number
.Generation time
.Shared genetic information
Limitations
.Outcomes can vary in humans

.Humans are complex organisms

.Cost

Phenotypic plasticity

Overview of Model Organisms - Niyati


 - Model organisms share genetic similarities with humans
-Helps us study complex biology in simpler organisms
- Offers a reliable space to test new methods
- Speed up the development of new biotechnologies 

foundational tools and environment of biotechnology research and development

Orthologs- genes in different species that came  from the same ancestor


#17 Model Organisms - Rana Temporaria-Frogs
Background Info
Common Name: Rana Temporaria
Location: Europe, can be found in Ireland and Japan
Size: Adult Frogs 2.8 to 3.9 inches/ weigh 0.80 ounces
Generation Time: 3 to 4 years depending on geography and climate 
Lifespan: 5-10 years 
Genetics & Economic Benefit
Genetic Manipulation: can be challenging due to their biology

Genome: Not a typical model organism 

Economic Benefit: Antimicrobial peptides & effectively treating diseases

Biotech History
Dating back to 1996
Antibiotics can be derived from secretions of frogs
Why is it important?
Landmark Studies
Nobel Prize in 1936 to Otto Loewi and Sir Henry Dale
Nobel Prize in 1967 to Ragnar Granit, Haldan Keffer Hartline and George Wald

Ethical Considerations
Appropriate housing conditions humidity and temperature 
Minimize harm, control breeding 
In Lab Setting
Water quality, temperature, lighting, population density, life stage management, controlled diet 

#5 Model Organism: Tobacco mosaic virus
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?

#5 Model Organism: Tobacco mosaic virus - Gourav

 


#5 Model Organism: Tobacco mosaic virus - Hrithik

#6 Model Organism: Escherichia coli 
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?

E-coli: shyamani 
Location:
found in the lower intestinal tracts of humans and many other warm-blooded animals
Rod-shaped bacterium
Under nutrient-rich, aerobic conditions at 37°C, E. coli can divide as quickly as once every 20 minutes.
Why E-coli is easy to manipulate?
> Simple genetic
>Fast growth and culture
>Extensive knowledge base


#6 Model Organism: Escherichia coli - Anudari

#7 Model Organism: Photosynthetic Cyanobacteria
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?

#7 Model Organism: Photosynthetic Cyanobacteria - Matthew

#8 Model Organism: Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?

#8 Model Organism: Saccharomyces cerevisiae - Ashia

#10 Model Organism: Caenorhabditis elegans
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?

#10 Caenorhabditis elegans - Olivia
-Found in Temperate soil
-1mm in length as adults
-Lifespan: 2-3 wks
-Generation time: 3-4 days
I’ve won 4 Nobel Prizes!
2002 - Brenner, Sulston, Horvitz
2006 - Mello, Fire
2008 - Tsien, Chalfie, Shimomura
2024 - Ruvkun, Ambros
Benefits:
Easy to manipulate
Transparent
Minimal Lab space
Free to obtain (depending)
Can be stored at room temp.
Complete map of lineage
1948
1963
X
1,2 - Caenorhabditis elegans - Wikipedia
3 - OrthoList: A Compendium of C. elegans Genes with Human Orthologs - PMC
4/8 - Maintenance of C. elegans
5 - History of research on Caenorhabditis elegans - Wikipedia
6 - The Worm That Won the World: How C. elegans got Four Nobel Prizes in Science | by Vyamasani Shravani | Jul, 2025 | Medium
C. Elegans image from SFU

#11 Model Organism: Arabidopsis thaliana 
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?

#11 Model Organism: Arabidopsis thaliana - Rocelle
Common name: Thale Cress/ Mouse-ear cress
Most widely studied plant “Humble weed”
Plant breeding, crop improvement, 
Floral dip method
Ethical considerations?

(simplify to 60s)
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
Thale cress/ mouse-ear cress, 6-12 inches tall, 4-5 weeks gen time, 8 week lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically? How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?
Very easy.  "floral dip" method. Researchers simply dip the flower buds into a solution of Agrobacterium containing the desired DNA. The bacteria then introduce the foreign DNA into the plant's cells, and the resulting seeds will be transgenic.
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
Not very similar. 19% they share a significant number of conserved, or orthologous, genes essential for basic cellular functions, with some studies indicating orthologs exist for a substantial portion of both genomes.
What is its potential economic benefit?
rice , wheat, maize
Faster breeding and gene editing. “Humble weed” allows researchers to quickly validate gene functions and apply those findings to crops with more complex or longer lifecycles. This allows for improved yields and plant resilience
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
Arabidopsis thaliana began to be widely used for biotech in the 1980s, gaining significant traction after the 1986 breakthrough in T-DNA-mediated transformation and the cloning of the first A. thaliana gene.Its widespread adoption culminated with the publication of the first complete plant genome sequence in 2000, solidifying A. thaliana's role as a foundational model for plant genomics and molecular biology 
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
The ABC model of flowers explains how three classes of genes (A, B, and C) interact to determine the type of floral organ (sepal, petal, stamen, or carpel) produced at different positions in the flower's whorls. This genetic framework allows biotechnologists to modify gene expression, which can lead to changes in flower structure, form, and color. Ultimately leading to biotech applications of plant breeding, crop improvement, and other evolutionary studies.
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
Genetically modified plants affecting natural biodiversity of plants, “naturalness”, slippery slope - will these findings ultimately transfer to human genome?




#12 Model Organism: Panicum virgatum
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?

#12 Model Organism: Panicum virgatum - Binay
Cool facts
Common name - switchgrass
Location - North America 
Size 1-3 meters!!
Generation time - 1 year 
Landmark - biofuel / cell wall regeneration 2013,2019,2000s
Life = 20 Year!!!
Manipulation - hard 
Humans - distant
Benefit - bioenergy/ soil
History - 1990-2000s genome sequencing


Concern - low, environment /land Maintain - Greenhouse/ growth chambers


#13 Model Organism: Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
Green Algae
Reproduction
Photosynthesis
Intraflagellar transport
Recent News
Green alga
• Habitat: soil & freshwater
• Size: ~10 µm
• Generation: 6–8 hrs
• Lifespan: indefinite 
1833 - Discovered
1888 - Named after botanist Johannes Theodor Reinhardt
Two core proteins of photosystem II
2007 - Complete nuclear genome published
2017 - CRISPR





Present - Bio Fuels







State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
Green alga (model organism)
• Habitat: soil & freshwater worldwide
• Size: ~10 µm
• Generation time: 6–8 hrs
• Lifespan: indefinite (in culture)

How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
Ease: C. reinhardtii is relatively easy to manipulate. It has a well-developed genetic toolkit: nuclear, chloroplast, and mitochondrial genomes can all be transformed.
Transformation methods include glass bead agitation, electroporation, and CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing.
This flexibility makes it a top choice for studying photosynthesis, flagella/cilia, and bioengineering.

How similar is its genome to the human genome?
Genome size: ~120 Mb, about 15x smaller than the human genome (~3,200 Mb).
Number of genes: ~15,000, compared to ~20,000–25,000 in humans.
Similarities: Although distant, it shares conserved eukaryotic genes (e.g., those for flagellar structure, ciliary proteins, introns, spliceosomes).
Important overlap: Studies in C. reinhardtii have helped understand ciliopathies, human diseases caused by defective cilia.

What is its potential economic benefit?
Biofuels: Engineering strains for hydrogen production, biodiesel, and renewable energy.
Biopharmaceuticals: Used to produce recombinant proteins, vaccines, and therapeutic enzymes.
Agriculture: Potential for biofertilizers and as a model to engineer photosynthetic efficiency.
Carbon capture: Research on algae for reducing CO₂ emissions.
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.

What are some landmark studies using this organism?
First major biotech use: mid-20th century, as a model for photosynthesis research.
Landmark disease relevance: Studies of its flagella/cilia provided insight into human ciliary disorders (ciliopathies, polycystic kidney disease, infertility, respiratory disorders).
Importance: First organism where hydrogen gas production from water splitting was demonstrated (early 2000s), sparking interest in green energy.

Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
Generally considered low ethical concern, similar to yeast or bacteria.
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?
Growth medium: TAP
Light: autotrophically (light + CO₂) or mixotrophically (acetate + light).
Conditions: 20–25 °C
Cryopreservation: Long-term storage is possible using cryoprotectants.


#13 Model Organism: Chlamydomonas reinhardtii - Ananya

#14 Model Organism: Drosophila melanogaster 
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?

#14 Model Organism: Drosophila melanogaster - Tania 
(Fruit Fly)
Common name: Fruit Fly
Size: ~3 mm
Generation time: ~10 days
Genome similarity: ~60% 
Research: 1901
Key uses: Genetics, disease models, developmental biology

#15 Model Organism: Danio rerio 
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?

#15 Model Organism: Danio rerio - Daniela N.
Common name: Zebrafish
Location: Asia/India
Size: 1”
GT: 3 months
Lifespan: 5 yrs
Genetic Manipulation
Breeding $
KO/KI
Similar to humans
Orthologous gene
Economic benefit $
H I S T O R Y
1960s University of Oregon
George Streisinger
Nervous System (1981)
L A N D M A R K S
Hair Cell Regeneration with DIptheria Toxin (2021)
Musical Dystrophies (2012)
Drug Repurposing for Dravet Syndrome (2013)
Armfield XLID Syndrome x Spliceosompathy (2020)
M A I N T E N A N C E
Small Diet
TemperatureControlled
I M P A C T S
High Content Screening
Infectious diseases
Neurological disorders
Anti-cancer compounds
Toxicity Assays

#15 Model Organism: Danio rerio - Shreya

Ambystoma mexicanum -Debbie
Common Name: Axolotl
Location: Lake Xochimilco
Size: 6-18 inches and weigh about 2-8 ounces  
Lifespan: 6 years (wild) and 15 years (captivity)
Axolotl’s can be genetically manipulated, but it can be very difficult. 
Axolotl’s and humans genomes are about 86% similar. 

Economic benefit
Insight into disease resistance
regeneration 
Providing more knowledge in wound healing and organ repair, which will in return help advance technology. 




Ambystoma mexicanum
History 		Used in research since 1930s discovered 1864
Why Important 	   Regenerates limbs, spinal cord, heart, even brain
Landmark Studies 	           Show scar-free regeneration insights for wound healing & stem cell research
https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/cell-and-developmental-biology/articles/10.3389/fcell.2022.786533/full 
Diseases/Uses: Models tissue repair, heart and neural development, regenerative medicine
Ethics: Critically endangered 		    need for conservation in research
Lab Care: Kept in clean, cool aquarium, fed bloodworms/pellets; bred in captivity
?
These little guys are simply a feat of nature. They can regenerate lost limbs, their spinal cord, and even parts of their brain!!!
 
We discovered them in Mexico in 1864 and have been studying their regenerative properties since the 30’s.
 
I attached a link to a paper explaining how they can regenerate without scaring and how their cells can transform from mature cells back into a stem cell like state.
 
In 2018 we sequenced their genome and now have a better understanding about which genes are activated to cause regeneration.
 
If we are able to better understand which genes or growth factors are activating, we could try to implement them into human studies. We could apply this to any wounds are hopefully have scar free healing in the future, especially in our hearts! Our tissue scars in our hearts when something goes wrong, but if we can figure out a way to cause scar free healing in our hearts the number of heart disease deaths should go down.
 
Unfortunately they are critically endangered in Mexico. They are only in fresh water, specifically lakes around Mexico city. Lakes have been drained to prevent flooding and heavily polluted causing them to only be found in one lake’s canal system.
 
But on the bright side, they do very well in captivity, kept in clean cool water, and are able to breed easily. So well in fact you can buy one at Petco for about $70. They may become extinct in the wild eventually but I doubt we will ever stop breeding them for research purposes.

#17 Model Organism: Xenopus laevis 
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?

#17 Model Organism: Xenopus laevis - Jacky

#18 Model Organism: Mus musculus 
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?

Mus musculus - Dhavalsinh 
Mice: Tiny Scientists’ Best Friends! 
Common Name: House Mouse
Also called Mus musculus, the most widely used animal model in labs worldwide.
Location: Found Worldwide
Originated in Asia but now lives everywhere humans do—homes, cities, and research labs.
Morphology: Small (7–10 cm & something like 20 gm). Short lifespan of 1-3  years with fast reproduction every 10 weeks. 
Genetics : Very easy to breed and modify genetically. About 85% of mouse genes are similar to human genes, making them excellent models for studying human diseases.


Mice: Tiny Scientists’ Best Friends! 
Economic Benefits : Mice are crucial for drug development, vaccine testing, and biotech innovations—saving time, money, and lives in research and medicine as well. 
Landmark Studies :  Cancer trials, Diabetes research , Stem cell therapy , CRISPR breakthroughs
Ethics & Lab Care : Raising concerns about animal welfare—researchers must minimize pain and follow the 3Rs: Replacement, Reduction, Refinement. Kept in pathogen-free cages with controlled light, temperature, and special diets to keep them healthy for experiments. 

#19 Model Organism: Rattus norvegicus
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?

#19 Model Organism: Norway Rat-Rattus norvegicus - Pal 
Common name: Norway rat 
Location: native to China and urban area
Size:  200–500 g, body length 20–25 cm, tail length 18–25 cm
Generation Time: 3 months
Lifespan: ~2–3 years in laboratory conditions
Lab maintenance: Housed in temperature-controlled rooms (20–26 °C), with 12:12 light-dark cycles.                                                   Maintained as specific-pathogen-free (SPF) colonies to prevent infections.                              Fed standardized pellet diet and water ad libitum.
Research Application :                                                        Neuroscience & Behavior – Learning, memory, addiction, and stress studies.Pharmacology & Drug Testing – Preclinical safety and efficacy evaluation.Cardiovascular & Metabolic Research – Models for hypertension, diabetes, and obesity.Cancer & Toxicology – Tumor biology and chemical/drug safety testing.Genetics & Immunology – CRISPR models, vaccine development, and immune studies.



#20 Model Organism: Oryctolagus cuniculus domesticus 
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?

#20 Model Organism: Oryctolagus cuniculus domesticus - Wanqian 
Rabbit Characteristic
Common name:Domestic Rabbit
Location:Widely distributed globally, originally from Europe
Size:40cm~50cm in length 
        2~5 kg in weight
Generation time: 3-4 mon
Lifespan: 5~10 year

Research Focus
Genetic Studies

Biotech Applications

Economic Links
Landmark Studies

Lab maintenance
Benefits in biotech
Ethical considerations
Disease Study:Similar physiology to humans (heart, metabolism) → study cardiovascular, metabolic diseases
Antibody Production:Produce polyclonal antibodies → commercial/medical use
Agriculture Value:Meat, fur production → economic benefit
Humane treatment: Proper housing, minimize pain/discomfort
Follow guidelines: Use fewest rabbits needed for experiments

Environment: Controlled temperature, light
Housing: Clean, spacious cages
Nutrition: Proper food, water supply

Atherosclerosis

Ophthalmology

#21 Model Organism: Rhesus macaque
State common name, location, size, generation time, and lifespan
How easy is it to manipulate genetically?
How similar is its genome to the human genome?
What is its potential economic benefit?
Biotech history: Year first used, what is it used for, its role in diseases, why it is important, etc.
What are some landmark studies using this organism?
Are there ethical considerations in using this organism for research?
How do researchers typically maintain and culture these organisms in a lab setting?

#21 Model Organism: Rhesus macaque - Mansi V.
Genetics & potential Economic Benefit;-
Manipulation:-Costly, Slow and limited but possible for specific studies.
Genome Similarity:-93% Similar to Human genome.
Economic Benefit:-Biomedical Research backbone,vaccine development, Genetic Research.
Biotech History:-
First use:- Early 20th  Century 
1930s - 40s Polio development
1980s HIV/AIDS.


Ethical Considerations:-
High Cognitive ability & Social Complexity, Long lifespan, Strict regulations ,Care standards.



Landmark studies:-
Vaccine for polio , Rh Factor, HIV/AIDS Research , Covid - 19 studies , genome Sequencing.

Lab maintenance:-
Methods:- Housing , Diet, Healthcare, Environmental Control.
Culturing Organisms:- Breeding, cell & tissue culture, Nutritional Support.
Biological profile:-
Common name:-Rhesus Monkey
Location:-South Asia (From India , Nepal, China, Afghanistan, Thailand)
Size:-19-25 in. long, 8-13 in. tail length
Weight:-Male:- 7-12 kg, Female:-5-7 kg, Newborn:-400-700 gm
Generation Time:- 11 Years
Lifespan:- 25-30 Years in captivity, Shorter in the wild (15-20 Years)

More Chapter 1

#22 Heterochromia iridum
What is heterochromia iridum due to genetic mosaicism?
What is the underlying genetic mosaicism mechanism that causes heterochromia iridum? 
What are the genetic and environmental factors that can cause heterochromia?
Is heterochromia iridum observed in species other than humans?
What are some other genetic mosaicism phenotypes in humans similar to heterochromia iridum?

Heterochromia Iridum - Daniela Taylor
OCA2 - production of melanin 
Mutations in OCA2 gene can affect the amount of distribution of melanin in the iris
HERC2 - regulates expression of OCA2
Mutations in regulatory region of HERC2 can affect expression of OCA2
Eye Color: Polygenic Phenotypic trait
How does this happen?
Genetic Mosaicism 
Biotechnology Applications
Change eye color (cosmetic) 
Treatment of conditions where heterochromia is a symptom 

                   Heterochromia Iridum- Sobia
                                                                       A condition where irises are different colors. 

                                                                      
                                                                                                                                   

                 Heterochromia Across Species: Humans vs. Animals
It is actually more prevalent in certain animal species due to genetic factors
Merle and Piebald Genes: These genes regulate the distribution of pigment-producing cells,which correlate with variations in eye color

White Spotting Patterns:The dominant white gene (W) and white spotting gene (S) can result in areas lacking melanocytes, affecting both fur and eye pigmentation.


Human Mosaicism Phenotypes:
- Waardenburg Syndrome
-Piebaldism
-Congenital Horner's Syndrome

Actors with heterochromia
 –Robert downey jr
               -Idina menzel

#23 Bacteriophage
How are bacteriophages and viruses used in biotechnology? 
Are there bacteriophages that can target antibiotic-resistant bacteria?
How have phage therapies advanced over the years? 
What are the limitations of using bacteriophage to treat infections?
What are some challenges in scaling up phage therapies?

#23 Bacteriophage - Isabella
Bacteriophage - a virus that infects and replicates in bacteria
Anatomy of a bacteriophage:
How they infect:
Inserting/removing genes 
in phage DNA
CRISPR-Cas antimicrobials
Target antibiotic resistant genes
Phage Therapies
Phage enzymes used for DNA editing
Engineered phages used to help detect contaminants

#23 Bacteriophage - Diana
Selectively target and kill bacteria. 
Used as a tool to fight against AMR
Improved through synthetic biology.
Challenges: scalability, regulation, resistance.

#24 Animal Cell Culture
Discuss animal cell culture. 
Name some model cell lines from humans, insects, and other animals. What are HeLa cells? 
How are they used? 
What are the risks of contamination in animal cell culture?
What are the pros and cons of using animal cell culture?
What is the role of stem cells in animal cell culture?

#24 Animal Cell Culture - Ayesha
Role of stem cells
Uses, benefits, & contamination

#24 Animal Cell Culture - Marylyn
Kidney epithelial cells from African green monkey  (Vero cells)
Virology research 
Vaccine production 
HELA Cells 
Henrietta Lacks
Immortal cancer cell line 
Toxican & radiation 
Cancer research

Insect cell line derived from the fall armyworm (Sf9)
Used for protein production 

#25 Subviral Infectious Agents
How do gene creatures impact the evolutionary trajectory of their host organisms?
Besides satellite viruses and plasmids, are there other types of genetic entities that qualify as gene creatures?
How might gene creatures be harnessed for biotechnological applications?
Transposons are often called "jumping genes." What are the evolutionary advantages and disadvantages of having these transposons within a genome?
What are Polintons, and how do they differ from other types of mobile genetic elements?
What are virophages such as Sputnik and Zamilon, and could they be engineered to combat human viral infections?

2
3
4
5
6
1
Genome rearrangement
Horizontal gene transfer
New traits 
Increased variability
Adaptation 
Regulatory innovation
Transposons, Polintons, retrotransposons, virophages, integrons, endogenous viruses

Gene therapy vectors
Genome editing
Synthetic biology
Pathogen control
Crop improvement
Advantages: diversity, adaptation, regulation; Disadvantages: mutagenesis, genome instability, disease risk

Large DNA transposons, encode viral proteins, self-replicating, more complex than classical transposons

Parasitize giant viruses, reduce replication, possible engineered antivirals, experimental challenges, host-specific
EVOLUTION
GENE
CREATURES
BIOTECH
TRANSPOSON
PROS + CONS
POLINTONS
VIROPHAGES
#25
APPLICATIONS
DNA segment
Self replicating/cutting
“Jumping gene”
Jaren Orbeck

Gene creatures are mobile genetic elements, including plasmids, transposons, virophages, and endogenous viruses. They shape evolution by moving genes around, creating new traits, and sometimes causing mutations that can be harmful or, in some cases, surprisingly beneficial.

Besides these plasmids and satellite viruses, there are transposons, retrotransposons, Polintons, giant viral-like transposons, and virophages, which are small viruses that parasitize other viruses.

Transposons, or jumping genes, can kick-start innovation in genomes but also wreak havoc on valuable genes. Polintons are notable as they are bigger and include viral-like proteins, so the boundary between transposons and viruses becomes blurred.

Virophages, including Sputnik and Zamilon, slow down giant viruses. While they do not yet target human viruses, they do hold a lot of hope for antiviral treatments in the future.

In biotechnology, gene editing tools are utilized in gene therapy and synthetic biology, transforming nature's inherent properties into powerful innovations. There are many hopes for new therapeutic techniques in the future, such as current developments in targeting different pathogens in the body, such as engineered virophages and various prion-based therapies.

In short, gene creatures are microscopic movers with huge power, both in evolution and in science. Regardless, we need more research into this area before anything can be fully developed.

Chapter 2

#26 Prokaryotic transcription
Discuss the role of sigma factors and operons in prokaryotic gene expression.
How is prokaryotic gene expression impacted by environmental factors?
How have bacteria like E. coli become central to biotechnological applications?
What role do bacterial plasmids play in genetic engineering?


#26 Prokaryotic transcription - Bansari

#28 Protein Translation
Discuss protein translation, including the steps involved and the roles of various translation factors. 
How does protein synthesis in eukaryotes differ from that in prokaryotes, and what are the implications for biotech?
How does post-translational modification occur?
What are some methods for studying translation in real-time?

Initiation
Elongation
Termination
IF1, IF2,IF3
eIF 1,2,3,4A,4B,4C,4D,5,6
Implications
Implications
Sun- Tag Imaging System
In-vivo Translation Imaging
Fluorescence Imaging Technology
Tagging Tools
Antibiotic Resistance
Environmental & Agricultural Impact
Molecular Medicine
#28 Protein Translation - Sadia
dCas, HiBiT
Translational Factors

#29 Symbiotic theory
Discuss the symbiotic theory for chloroplasts and mitochondria. 
Explain differences to the central dogma in these symbiotic organelles. 
What is the evidence supporting the symbiotic theory? What are some arguments against the symbiotic theory?
How have mitochondria and chloroplasts been utilized in biotechnological applications?

Symbiotic Theory - The Power of Friendship (Griffin)
Mitochondria Chloroplast
Eukaryote
Our
Ancestors
What?
The Central Dogma
Ancestral cells were a combo of
Primordial eukaryotes
Prokaryotes joining the party!

Strengthened host cell in unique ways
Mitochondria - aerobic metabolism
Cyanobacteria - photosynthesis
Central Dogma: flow of genetic data
DNA to…
RNA to…
Proteins!

Mitochondria and Chloroplasts both have their OWN DNA
Can work independently of nucleus!
Eukaryote
Prokaryote
https://bio.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Microbiology/Microbiology_(Kaiser)/Unit_4%3A_Eukaryotic_Microorganisms_and_Viruses/07%3A_The_Eukaryotic_Cell/7.8%3A_The_Endosymbiotic_Theory

#29 Symbiotic theory - Owais
Autogenous theory
Protein Translocation
Mitochondrial replacement therapy
mRNA Vaccine in Lettuce Chloroplasts
Agreement with Theory
Arguments with Theory
Own Dna & Cell membrane 
Cell Division 
Biotech Advancements

The End

Best Slide Award
GREAT
SLIDE
GREAT
SLIDE
GREAT
SLIDE

Best Slide Award
Most Informative
Award
Best Visuals
Award
Data Presentation Mastery
Clear Message Award
Slide Simplicity Award
Best Layout Design
Most Engaging Slide
Most Concise
Award
Best Use of Graphics Award
