Set #3
Talking Points
Sept 22, 2022

Talking Points Guide

Talking Points Guide
Talking points were assigned during last week’s class
Each student was assigned to two talking points.
Each talking point will have at least two students talking about it
If you share a talking point with another student:
listen to what they say
try to not repeat or duplicate what they said
90 seconds of content is not much content!
Contributing gets you more discussion points
If you have something interesting to say about someone else's talking you can score some extra points.
Asking questions of other students gets you discussion marks as well

Talking Points Guide
Edit and update your slide
Add several pictures and some text
It is best to have as few words as possible on your slide -- you do the talking not your slide
Be prepared to give a 60-90 second presentation about each of your assigned talking point
define the talking point, describe its relation to biotechnology, or provide a recent example of the talking point in biotechnology news
Try to be unique
Don’t just copy the book, use the internet for research. 
Provide your own perspective
Please put into your own words
It is okay if you read your notes, but put notes in your own words
No direct quoting of an article, wikipedia or the textbook
Minimize jargon

Tips for a Good Presentation
Remember you telling a story. Should have a beginning, a middle, and an end. 
Respect the time allotted for the sake of your audience. 
If you go over time, they are no longer focusing on the talk, but watching the clock to see when you are going to stop. 
Explain at the level of the class. 
Have a technical term, define it. If you don't quite understand it, no one will. 
Because we are all novices, you will need to have a long intro. 
But try to engage the audience. 
Do not read from your slides; use notecards, if you must.
No complete sentences on slides, use short phrases, break the content up. 
Try to have a picture on every slide, helps maintain attention of the audience 
If you have a movie, talk during the movie, do not use narrator
Be prepared for questions. 
Show ENTHUSIASM when you talk and make it exciting! 

Best Advice
Be Enthusiastic
Use More Pictures and Diagrams on your Slides
be a visual storyteller
Use Less Words on your Slides
put the words in your notes, not the slide
Keep Things to the Point
Be creative with your slide with look and content; go beyond the book

Chapter 9

#1 - Laura  

1. What is proteomics? What is metabolomics? What are they used for?


-i


-Proteomics is the large scale study of proteins
-Metabolomics is the analysis of metabolites in a biological specimen
-Important in disease diagnostics and in characterization and screening of organisms

#1- Meaghan   
What is proteomics? 
The large-scale study of proteins 
Various separation techniques 
PAGE, SDS-PAGE, gel electrophoresis, HPLC 
Uses 
When and where proteins are expressed 
Rate of protein production 
What is metabolomics? 
The large-scale study of small molecules 
Major Approaches 
Targeted analysis, metabolite profiling, metabolic fingerprinting 
Various Separation Techniques 
NMR, GC-MS, HPLC-MS 
Uses 
To view the relationship between physiology and external events/conditions 
To measure responses 


#2 Kimberly
Protein gel: Polyacrylamide gel (PAGE)
Smaller pores than agarose gel
Samples are boiled with SDS
Stained with Coomassie Blue or a silver stain

#2-Meaghan  
What are some different types of protein gels? 
Tris Acetate- SDS-PAGE, Native PAGE- high MW 
Tricine- SDS-PAGE- low MW
IEF- IEF- isoelectric point  
Zymogram- Protease Detection- proteolytic activity
What is western blotting? 
Used to detect a specific protein within a sample of blood or tissue 
5 mains steps 
Transfer, blocking, primary antibody incubation, secondary antibody incubation, protein detection, western blotting analysis 
Compare them to nucleic acid gels from last week.
Nucleic Acid Gels- separation of charged macromolecules 
SDS-PAGE- separation by MW, all primarily negatively charged molecules 

#3 Rawan 
3. What is column chromatography? What is size-exclusion and ion-exchange chromatography? 


#3 Chromatography - Ozzie 
Liquid chromatography
Mobile and stationary phase
Size exclusion and ion exchange chromatography
Common tags
His or GST
Used in liquid chromatography
Separated liquid molecules from mobile phase by polar affinity to stationary phase (small non polar  compounds elute first)
Mobile is solvents and sample mixture
Solvents usually water, methanol, organic solvents.
Stationary phase is polar solids, silica gel and alumina
(polar stationary phase) with uniform shape and size 
Size exclusion -seperates via size and molecular weight
Ion exchange chromatography is used to seperate biological molecules (proteins, peptides, aa)
A commonly used metaphor to illustrate affinity binding is the lock and key analogy. 
A unique structure present on the surface of a protein is the key that will only bind to the corresponding lock, a specific ligand on a chromatographic support.
In the first step, a recombinant protein mixture is passed over a chromatography support containing a ligand that selectively binds proteins that contain an affinity-tag sequence (typically His (histadine)  or GST (glutathione S- transferaseamino acid protein)). Contaminants are washed away, and the bound protein is then eluted in pure form.
His binds with good selectivity to Ni2+ or other transition metals immobilized to the ligand; the tagged protein can be selectively eluted with imidazole
proteins tagged with GST bind to glutathione as the ligand, and are eluted with solutions of glutathione


#4 -Dlen
4. How do we identify unknown proteins? How does a Mass Spectrometry work? What are the three main components of a mass spectrometer? How is protease digestion used in mass spec?
Identifying unknown Proteins
Amino acid composition
Partial sequence data
Mass Spectrometry for protein identification
Atomic and molecular composition
Mass Spectrometer components
Ion source
Mass Analyzer
Detector
Protease Digestion
Cleave protein into peptides
Figure 4. Protease Digestion for Mass Spectrometry
Figure 3. Steps for Proteomic analysis
Figure 1. Mass Spectrometry
Figure 2. Mass Spectrometry 
Components
https://www.researchgate.net/figure/The-three-principle-components-of-the-mass-spectrometer-with-examples-of-each_fig1_6142959 
https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Steps-of-proteomic-analysis-using-mass-spectrometry-after-separation-and-in-gel-digestion_fig4_258667303
https://www.promega.com/resources/guides/protein-analysis/protease-digestion-for-mass-spec/
https://www.mks.com/n/mass-spectrometry


#4-Tania   
4. How do we identify unknown proteins? How does a Mass Spectrometry work? What are the three main components of a mass spectrometer? How is protease digestion used in mass spec?
Mass Spectrometry for Protein Identification
Mass Spectrometry Basics
 Protein Prep 
Reducing agents 
Protease digestion destroys unwanted characteristics 
Ion Source 
MALDI
ESL
Mass Analyser 
Mass to charge ratio (m/z) separation 
Detector 
Time of flight 
Quadrupole ion traps 
https://sisu.ut.ee/heritage-analysis/52-mass-spectrometry
4. How do we identify unknown proteins? How does a Mass Spectrometry work? What are the three main components of a mass spectrometer? How is protease digestion used in mass spec?

#5 - Nathi 

Phage display is a technique used to study protein interactions such as protein-protein, protein-peptide, and protein-DNA using bacteriophages. 

#5 iqbal: Explain phage display? How does it work? include its applications, library construction, library screening, binding selection


Phage display is a laboratory technique for the study of protein–protein, protein–peptide, and protein–DNA interactions that uses bacteriophages (viruses that infect bacteria) to connect proteins with the genetic information that encodes them.
                                                                                                                 


#5 iqbal: Explain phage display? How does it work? include its applications, library construction, library screening, binding selection

Applications:                                     library construction
                                                            

Epitope mapping and mimicking
Identification of new receptors and ligands
Drug discovery
Epitope discovery - new vaccines
Creation of antibody libraries
Organ targeting


#6 ELISA - Kher
6. How does ELISA work? Sandwich vs. Indirect method. What are some biotechnology products that use ELISA? What protein markers are detected for different diseases/pregnancy?
Indirect ELISA
2 binding processes of primary antibody and labeled secondary antibody

Sandwich ELISA
Antigen protein sandwiched between primary and secondary antibody
2-5 times more sensitive

#6   Rikita        ELISA
6. How does ELISA work? Sandwich vs. Indirect method. What are some biotechnology products that use ELISA? What protein markers are detected for different diseases/pregnancy?
ELISA (which stands for enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) is a technique to detect the presence of antigens in biological samples. An ELISA, like other types of immunoassays, relies on antibodies to detect a target antigen using highly specific antibody-antigen interactions.
Sandwich Vs. Indirect: the difference between indirect & sandwich ELISA is that indirect, the microtiter plate is coated with the sample with proteins to be detected whereas the plate is coated with primary antibody in sandwich ELISA. Sandwich ELISA is  2-5 times more sensitive. Both of these method are solid phase enzyme immunoassays. 
Product of Biotechnology Use ELISA : Covid-19 & RSV vaccine, test of HIV, allergens in the food such as milk, egg, almonds.
Protein markers for pregnancy: PAPP-A ( pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A) produced by placenta in early pregnancy, AFP ( alpha-fetoprotein) produced by the liver and yolk.




#7 Rapid Tests - Deena
PCR - Looks for genetic material from the virus. Are more expensive and require more specialized equipment. 
Rapid Antigen test- Looks for molecules on the surface of the virus. Quicker (15 mins) and run in a lab or Dr’s office. Positive results are accurate, but there is a higher chance of false negatives.
How it works: 
Sterile swab is inserted into nose. 
Swab is placed into a tube. Swab is stirred 5 times. 
Tube is squeezed to extract the liquid 
Three drops are added to a specimen well. 
Test is read after 15 mins.
PCR - Looks for genetic material from the virus. Are more expensive and require more specialized equipment. 
Rapid Antigen test- Looks for molecules on the surface of the virus. Quicker (15 mins) and run in a lab or Dr’s office. There is a fine line between speed and accuracy. Positive results are accurate, but there is a higher chance of false negatives.

#7 Brianna 
Covid-19 Rapid Antigen Testing Vs Other Options
Hi! I didn’t really mentioned other tests, if you want to talk more about the PCR test? I brought it up to say how its different but nothing more so you could have something to talk about. -Deena 
7. How do COVID-19 rapid antigen tests work? How accurate are they? Are they more likely to have a false-negative or a false-positive? How do rapid antigen tests compare to other tests?

Chapter 10

#8 Sonia
8. How do you obtain cDNA for the human genes? How is insulin mass produced? Why did they modify the insulin gene for mass production? What is the process? (Chapter 10 in 2nd edition, Chapter 15 in 1st Edition?)
mRNA gene of interest is converted into cDNA
cDNA is cloned → bacterial promoter and bacterial terminator
Bacterial transcription and translation machinery→ coding sequence 
cDNA is inserted into plasmid
Expression  
Mass Production of insulin:
Recombinant DNA is a technology scientist developed
Insert a human gene into the genetic material of a common bacteria 




#8 Hammad
cDNA for Human genes,
cDNA can be generated by viruses and retrotransposons for integration of RNA into target genomic DNA.
RNA will be purified from other cellular components.
cDNA is then synthesized through in vitro reverse transcription.
Mass production of Insulin

Modification of  the insulin gene for mass production
Not constrained by the killing of animals.
Making large amounts is quick.
No chance of infection transmission.


#9 Shahd
Surplus production → inclusion bodies (i.e. nonfunctional protein)
Lower temp of bacterial cultures
Lower concentration of IPTG
Cold shock
Protein misfolding
Parkinson’s, Huntington’s, Alzheimer's, cystic fibrosi, degenerative & neurodegenerative diseases
What are the toxic effects of protein overproduction? What can we do to prevent inclusion bodies?
Parkinsons → tau , alzheimers → amyloid

#9 Audrey
Amyloidosis is a condition that causes to overproduce proteins in organs (amyloid)
Recent study on overexpression of HER2 protein in tubo-ovarian high grade serous carcinomas (TO-HGSC)
provide molecular chaperones that help fold the recombinant protein correctly
Amyloidosis can affect the heart, kidneys, liver, spleen, nervous system, stomach or intestines. The condition is rare (affecting fewer than 4,000 people in the 
United States each year), but it can be fatal.
In summary, HER2 overexpression/amplification was found in 2% of TO-HGSC. explore HER2-targeted therapies in TO-HGSC 


#10 Ethan
10. Explain the differences of protein expression by yeast vs. bacteria. Why would one choose to produce protein with yeast?
Yeast
Bacteria
Eukaryote
Tech made mostly for S. cerevisiae
Complicated organization
Quality DNA repair mechanisms 
Grows quickly
Well adaptation
Less expensive
Genome is well mapped 
Prokaryote
Possible toxicity 
Simple organization
Fast DNA repair
No post translational modification 
Can not produce multidomain proteins
Can be hard to extract
Protein Expression Showdown
Big takeaway: Yeast is like a simple human cell and is easy to manipulate

#10 Sonia
10. Explain the differences of protein expression by yeast vs. bacteria. Why would one choose to produce protein with yeast?
Protein expression in yeast  makes a good model organism because it is single celled eukaryotic and can be purified easily
Yeast can be grown in a big or small scale 
Variety of yeast promoters are suitable for driving the expression of cloned genes


#11 Audrey
Fake Burgers Have More Fiber and Less Cholesterol Than Red-Meat Burgers. Beyond and Impossible contain roughly the same amount of saturated fat and more sodium,”

#11 Kimberly
Soy Leghemoglobin: leghemoglobin is a protein found in soy.
Carries heme which is what  gives meat its tasty flavor

Impossible Burger vs. Beyond Burger:
Pea protein is the main ingredient for BB
BB contains less saturated fat
Both are high in sodium
Impossible burger looks more like beef


#12 iqbal:  How does protein expression by insect cells work? Why is a virus used rather than normal expression?

Vectors derived from viruses                                                                                     
Baculoviruses
Only infect insects
Most common - MNPV
Two stages for protein expression
1. Transfer vector from E. coli carries MNPV DNA
2. Segment w/ cloned gene recombine into baculovirus




#12 Insect- Ozzie
Insect Baculovirus
Why is a virus used rather than normal expression
12. How does protein expression by insect cells work? Why is a virus used rather than normal expression?
baculovirus worked as a vector of foreign genes, by infect insect cells or insect larvae to produce exogenous proteins. It is an important part of the eukaryotic expression system.
Baculovirus is extensively utilized as an excellent tool for production of recombinant protein in insect cells. 
Baculovirus infects insects in nature and is non-pathogenic to humans. In addition to insect cells, baculovirus is capable of transducing a broad range of animal cells.

Advantages of insect baculovirus expression system
1). Safe
2). Large capacity of carrying foreign genes
3). High expression level of exogenous protein
4). The expressed eukaryotic gene products can be properly folded and modified, thus have good bioactivity.


Insect cells present several comparative advantages to mammalian cells, such as ease of culture, higher tolerance to osmolality and by-product concentration and higher expression levels when infected with a recombinant baculovirus.



#13 Mammals - Deena
13. How does protein expression by mammalian cells work? What is the advantages of mammalian cells for protein expression? What is an IRES?
Mammalian expression is the most preferred system for protein expression, or studying the function of a protein in the most physiologically relevant environment. 
The BacMam system uses modified insect cell virus to deliver and express genes in mammalian cells with minimum effort and toxicity. 
	It works by producing proteins in two ways, either transiently or through the use of stable cell lines. 

IRES: Internal Ribosomal entry site ->



#13 Hammad




Protein expression by mammalian cells
In mammalian cells, Protein expression can be achieved by viral-mediated transduction by technique  BacMam system.
Recombinant baculoviruses are used in this method to easily transduce mammalian cells, producing milligram quantities of protein for structural research.
Advantages of mammalian cells for protein expression
The primary benefits of mammalian cell expression are that the signals 
for eukaryotic protein synthesis, processing, and secretion are correctly 
and effectively recognized by the mammalian cells.
IRES( internal ribosome entry site,)


Chapter 11

#14-Dlen
How can one use protein engineering to improve protein stability? What amino acids can be changed to to improve stability?
Alter enzyme coding sequence
Introduction of disulfide bond
Change two amino acids
Changes in protein folding
Decreasing unfolded conformations
Replace glycine with other amino acid
Change N-terminal for improved stability
https://bioresourcesbioprocessing.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s40643-019-0288-y
http://what-when-how.com/molecular-biology/alpha-helix-310-helix-and-pi-helix-molecular-biology/


#14 Protein Stability - Kher
14. How can one use protein engineering to improve protein stability? What amino acids can be changed to improve stability?
Changing asparagine/glutamine to other amino acids
Undergo deamidation at high temperature
Changes in protein folding and loss of biological activity
Thermo-stable amino acids 
triose phosphate isomerase

To enhance recombinant protein stability
N-terminal amino acid can be altered
PEST sequences can be removed

#15 - Nathi
Directed evolution
Directed evolution is a method to design proteins with desirable functions by introducing random mutations into a particular gene of interest.
Mutagenesis
Screening
Gene amplification 


#15 Brianna
Methods of directed evolution and its comparison to ribozyme selection
15. What are methods for directed evolution? compare to ribozyme selection from last week.

#16 RIKITA          Shuffle
16. Explain recombining domains, DNA shuffling, and combinatorial libraries
Recombining protein domain: domain are distinct functional or structural units in a protein. Usually they are responsible for a particular function or interaction, contributing to the overall role of a protein. Domains may exist in variety of biological contexts.
DNA shuffling: known as molecular breeding, is an in vitro random recombination method to generate mutant genes for directed evolution & to enable a rapid Increase in DNA library size.

#17 Rawan
Denovo protein design: What is it?
Baker Lab using denovo technique; axle-rotor devices, paving the pathway for new nanoscale machinery 
https://www.bakerlab.org/2022/04/21/de-novo-designed-rotary-proteins/
17. Explain de novo protein design? Have scientists designed any novel proteins to date? Go to the Baker Lab website. How does the Baker lab (http://bakerlab.org  ) design proteins?

#18- Tania 
18. What is alpha-fold? How has it been used in protein structure determination? https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AlphaFold  
 Artificial Intelligence system that is highly accurate at predicting the structure of proteins 
Open access to millions of protein structures 
Applications 
Understudied proteins related to COVID-19
https://assets-global.website-files.com/621e749a546b7592125f38ed/6228b4b73876ce2619d22060_fig%201.gif 
https://alphafold.ebi.ac.uk/
https://www.nature.com/scitable/topicpage/protein-structure-14122136/#:~:text=The%20most%20common%20method%20used,atoms%20within%20the%20protein%20crystal.
https://www.deepmind.com/open-source/computational-predictions-of-protein-structures-associated-with-covid-19 

#18 Shahd
An AI program that predicts 3D protein structure
Highly accurate (pinpoint accuracy)
Application: 
SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19)
18. What is alpha-fold? How has it been used in protein structure determination? https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AlphaFold  


#19 Ethan
19. Explain the role of non-natural amino acids? Are there any practical applications of non-natural amino acids? If we expand tRNA to recognize a codon of 4 bases, how does this change the genetic code?
Can increase affinity and selective stability 
Can help stabilize secondary structures 
Used in protein production production
It would cause a whole shift in dna reading causing our DNA to be useless
If we were born this way our Chromosomes would be much larger to accommodate the extra nucleotide for every single codon

#19 - Laura
19. Explain the role of non-natural amino acids? Are there any practical applications of non-natural amino acids? If we expand tRNA to recognize a codon of 4 bases, how does this change the genetic code?
-Non-natural AA are used in manipulation of a range of protein properties

-Used for therapeutic approaches, controlling protein function, signal transduction, spectroscopic techniques

-Change structure and function of a protein

The End
