Set #2
Talking Points
Sept 15, 2022

Talking Point Assignments
Talking Point #1: DNA isolation -- Dlen, Rikita, 
Talking Point #2: NA gels -- Kimberly, Audrey, 
Talking Point #3: DNA detection -- Laura, Sonia, 
Talking Point #4: FISH -- Nathi, Audrey, 
Talking Point #5: DNA cloning -- Shahd, Sonia, Hammad
Talking Point #6: gene library -- Nathi, Meaghan, 
Talking Point #7: in vitro DNA -- Rawan, Deena, 
Talking Point #8: chemical DNA -- Ozzie, Shahd, 
Talking Point #9: Sanger DNA -- Kher, Rawan, Dlen
Talking Point #10: Next Gen DNA -- Ethan, Deena, 
Talking Point #11: What is PCR -- Tania, Meaghan, 
Talking Point #12: RAPD -- Laura, Iqbal, 
Talking Point #13: RT-PCR/qPCR -- Hammad, Ozzie, 
Talking Point #14: RNA classes -- Brianna, Rikita, 
Talking Point #15: siRNA -- Kher, Tania, 
Talking Point #16: ribozymes -- Iqbal, Ethan, 
Talking Point #17: RNA selection -- Brianna, Kimberly, 
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1z00qpakUYeJNYL_onsqeviyl7LigNMeGvuWSSSWQfJY/edit#gid=132086369 

Talking Points Guide

Talking Points Guide
Talking points were assigned during last week’s class
Each student was assigned to two talking points.
Each talking point will have at least two students talking about it
If you share a talking point with another student:
listen to what they say
try to not repeat or duplicate what they said
90 seconds of content is not much content!
Contributing gets you more discussion points
If you have something interesting to say about someone else's talking you can score some extra points.
Asking questions of other students gets you discussion marks as well

Talking Points Guide
Edit and update your slide
Add several pictures and some text
It is best to have as few words as possible on your slide -- you do the talking not your slide
Be prepared to give a 60-90 second presentation about each of your assigned talking point
define the talking point, describe its relation to biotechnology, or provide a recent example of the talking point in biotechnology news
Try to be unique
Don’t just copy the book, use the internet for research. 
Provide your own perspective
Please put into your own words
It is okay if you read your notes, but put notes in your own words
No direct quoting of an article, wikipedia or the textbook
Minimize jargon

Chapter 3

#1 Dlen  
1. Explain DNA Isolation from Cells. How does the isolation of eukaryotic DNA differ from prokaryotes? Focus on how to break open the cells.
DNA isolation is  extraction process of DNA from different sources.
Three steps: lysis, precipitation and purification.
Lysis- nucleus and cells broken releasing DNA.
Precipitation- separates DNA from debris. 
Purification- remove cellular debris and unwanted material.
mtDNA in eukaryotes.
8 methods for breaking the cell walls
Mechanical 
Blenders, presses, sonication,and grinding with Abrassive.
Non-mechanical 
Enzymatic digestion and chemical methods
Prokaryotes bacterial cell treated with lysosomes.
Eukaryotic cells have a membrane bound nucleus.
Plant and fungi have cell walls.
https://www.krackeler.com/catalog/sigma/ROCHE/11667327001
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6425773/Dna-isolation-methods
https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/mhccmajorsbio/chapter/dna-isolation-gel-electrophoresis-and-pcr/
https://sciencenotes.org/prokaryotic-vs-eukaryotic-similarities-and-differences/
https://www.biosciencenotes.com/cell-disruption-technique/



#1 Rikita  
1. Explain DNA Isolation from Cells. How does the isolation of eukaryotic DNA differ from prokaryotes? Focus on how to break open the cells.
There are three steps involved in DNA isolation such as:
Lysis
Precipitation
purification. 
Isolation eukaryotic DNA differ from prokaryotes because eukaryotes has mitochondrial DNA where prokaryotes does not have. 
How to break open cell: 8 Methods to break the cell.
Mortar & Pestle
Beadbeating
Sonication
Homogenizer
Freezing
High temperature
Enzymes
chemicals.



#2 Kimberly
2. Explain Nucleotide Electrophoresis. Gel types, staining. Explain the process of Southern Blotting.
Agarose is main ingredient for the gel
Separates fragments based on size and then compared to a ladder
Stain is added to sample and then looked at under a UV light.



#2  Audrey
Steps of southern blotting:
DNA digestion
Gel electrophoresis
Blotting
Probe labeling 
Hybridization and washing
Detection
Used to identify a sample of DNA


Digest the DNA with an appropriate restriction enzyme.
Run the digest on an agarose gel.
Denature the DNA (usually while it is still on the gel). ... 
Transfer the denatured DNA to the membrane. ... 
Probe the membrane with labeled ssDNA. ... 
Visualize your radioactively labeled target sequence.



#3 Laura 
3. How does UV absorption for DNA work? What are three methods for detecting specific sequences of DNA? 
-UV absorption, measure absorbance at 260nm
-A second absorbance collected at 280nm is collected to determine purity ratio. Pure DNA ratio = 1.8
-Ways to detect specific sequences:
	-Radioactive labeling
	-Fluorescence
	-Chemical tagging

#3 Sonia 
3. How does UV absorption for DNA work? 
Nucleic acids strongly absorb UV light with wavelengths of 260 nm due to the resonance structure of the purine and pyrimidine bases. 
The intensity of this absorbance is proportional to the concentration of nucleic acid. 
What are three methods for detecting specific sequences of DNA? 
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)
Southern blot 
Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH)


#4 Nathi  
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is a technique used to look at genes or chromosomes in cells and tissues.
Single strand of DNA that contain a fluorescent dye (probes) and added to a cell or tissue sample.
Probes hybridize to onto the complementary sequences in certain genes or chromosomes in cells/tissues.
Light up when viewed under a fluorescence microscope.
Uses
Gene mapping (Identify where a specific gene is located on a chromosome)
Number of genes present
Detect chromosomal abnormalities
Diagnose genetic diseases

In situ – In position/ in its original place 


#4 Audrey  
In situ → in natural or original position or place
Recently has been used in malignant tumor studies
provides researchers with a way to visualize and map the genetic material in an individual's cells, including specific genes or portions of genes. 

#5 Shahd 
DNA cloning is the process of making exact replicas of a piece of DNA*.
Isolation 
Insert is inserted into circular DNA piece
Ligation 
Transformation
Plasmid vectors used to drive plasmids into host cell
pBR322 Vector 
→ used in E. coli & genetic engineering
→ allows rapid &  simple preparation of plasmids 
→ Contains 2 antibiotic resistance genes
-often times genes*
4 steps
Isolation of the target DNA fragment (insert) to be copied
Ligation of inserts into a cloning vector → recombinant molecules (plasmids)
Transformation: Plasmids are transformed into bacteria or other suitable host






#5 Sonia 
5. Explain DNA Cloning with Plasmid Vectors (types, features, uses). Select a commercial plasmid (e.g., pJet 1.2) and describe its use?
DNA cloning is a technique that makes many identical copies of a particular piece of DNA, such as a gene. 
A specific (target) gene is inserted into a circular piece of DNA called a plasmid. 
Then the plasmid is introduced into a bacteria. When the bacteria reproduce, they replicate the plasmid and pass it onto their offspring (making copies of the DNA it contains). 
Commercial Plasmid
Lentiviral Packaging Plasmid Mix → psPAX2/pMD2.G 

#5 Hammad 



      It is the process of making identical copies of particular piece of DNA.
                   Steps involved in DNA Cloning

Isolation of DNA(Gene of interest) & Insertion into the suitable vector.
Introduction of recombinant DNA into suitable host
Selection and screening methods of recombinant clones.

                                             Plasmid pJet 1.2           
Positive selection cloning vector.
Lethal insert in a positive selection cloning vector enables effective recovery of blunt-ended PCR products.


DNA CLONING

#6 Nathi 
A gene library is a large collection of DNA fragments cloned from an organism
Uses 
Genome mapping and genome sequencing
Study genetic mutation
Study genetic diseases


#6 Meaghan 
What is a gene library? 
A gene library is a collection of genomic DNA from a single organism
Typically stored as self replicating vectors of different inserts of DNA
Genes of interest
How do you construct one? 
Isolate a sample of DNA from organism 
Cut the DNA into pieces with restriction enzymes 
Cut cloning plasmid with same restriction enzyme 
Add cut plasmid, genomic DNA, and DNA ligase to same test tube 
What is it used for?
Used to collect and store genetic information 
To study gene regulation 
To study effects of a mutation 
Used to find natural products 
Antimicrobials 
Uncover and optimize biochemical pathways 


Chapter 4

#7 Rawan
In Vitro DNA synthesis 
In a laboratory 
DNA denatured by heat
a short single-stranded oligonucleotide of DNA is used as a primer
In Vivo DNA synthesis 

Inside the body
DNA denatured by enzymes
Uses RNA primer  
7. Explain the process of in vitro DNA synthesis (using enzymes). Compare it to the in vivo process. What do “in vitro” and “in vivo” mean?


#7 Deena
in vitro DNA synthesis (using enzymes): 
In vitro DNA synthesis is when PCR copies DNA using a special type of DNA polymerase, known as Taq DNA polymerase.

In Vitro: It is an outside living organism. The in vitro synthesis is done by temperature.
In Vivo: In a living organism.


So in vitro DNA synthesis is the replication of a DNA molecule within a laboratory mixture that has all the necessary enzymes and components.

The polymerase chain reaction is an in vitro process 
DNA replication is an in vivo process

The Taq is utilized because it has the capacity to function at higher temperatures.



#8 Chemical DNA - Ozzie
Chemical synthesis of DNA (without enzymes)
-Phosphoramidites synthesis: Standard for Oligonucleotide synthesis
Why bother synthesizing DNA chemically?
Allows for manipulation and research needed in genetic testing and therapeutic medicines.


PHos four amid dites
What are phosphramidites: modified nucleosides with protection groups that enhances synthesis that can be easily manipulated by scientist using basic reactions 
Allows control over what bases are addedin cyclic reaction
Liquid and solid phosphramidite synthesis
What is oligonucleotide:  short single stranded  DNA or RNA—-------------
Modified nucleosides allow for oligonucleotide synthesis,.  Gold Standard  since  1981
 but theres some more efficient ways involving silicon chips now. 




#8 Shahd
Genetic engineering & enzyme chemistry
→ Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
→ Small piece of double stranded DNA into solution containing DNA polymerase, nucleotides & primers
→ Solution heated to separate DNA strands
→ When cooled, polymerase creates copy of each strand
→ Repeat every 5 minutes 
Revolutionized science 
Quicker
Forensics, microbio, medical diagnostics
Drug manufacturing, gene therapy
No need to begin with pre-existing DNA sequences

#9 Kher 
Shotgun sequencing
To sequence long DNA strands of whole genome
Random broken up short DNA segment strands
Fragmentation + sequencing 
overlapping reads for target DNA
Sanger sequencing
To determine the sequence of nt bases in a short DNA strand (100-1,000 bp in length)
99.99% base accuracy 
Steps:
DNA sequence of chain termination PCR
Size separation of chain-terminated oligonucleotides by gel electrophoresis
Gel analysis and determination of DNA sequence 



At the end the fragments are labelled with dyes which denotes the final nucleotide. After the reaction is completed the fragments are let to run through the tube which contains a matrix of gel for performing gel electrophoresis.
The short fragments are moved quickly and the long fragments are moved very slowly.
However, when these fragments reach the end line laser is illuminated depending upon the coloured dyes. And from the coloured dyes the original piece of DNA can be detected. And the sequence of DNAs is being read in a chromatogram.


#9 Rawan
Shotgun Sequencing
 Used for synthesizing longer sequences 
DNA is shredded into smaller pieces (by restriction enzymes)
Employs computational biological techniques to look for overlaps in DNA 


9. (Not in book/use internet) How does the Sanger DNA Sequencing work? How did they go from using gel electrophoresis to fluorescence? Explain shotgun sequencing.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sanger_sequencing 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shotgun_sequencing 

#9 Dlen
 Sanger DNA Sequencing and shotgun sequencing
Sanger is DNA sequencing involving electrophoresis, with random process of chain terminating dideoxynucleotides by DNA polymerase.
Sequencing in form of extension products of different lengths terminated at ddNTP.
DNA sequences with reads of >500 and 99.99% accurate.
Short DNA strands of 100- 1000 base pairs.
Shotgun sequencing technique determines DNA sequence of an organism's genome.


Shotgun sequencing
Sanger DNA sequencing
https://www.researchgate.net/figure/The-Sanger-sequencing-method-in-7-steps-1-The-dsDNA-fragment-is-denatured-into-two_fig2_234248746
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sanger_sequencing https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shotgun_sequencing 
https://www.genome.gov/genetics-glossary/Shotgun-Sequencing


#10 Ethan
10. (Not in book/use internet) Describe the three main Next Generation Sequencing techniques. Which one is the fastest? Which one is the cheapest? 
Pyrosequencing (Roche 454) 
	Using detection of light when DNA polymerase binds to a nucleotide letting off pyrophosphates
Run time is about 4 hours   
70 Cents per Run
Sequencing by synthesis (Illumina) 
	Fragments DNA makes multiple copies of reverse and forward strands then pieces them back together
	Max 150$ No upfront price available
	3 hours per run 
Ion semiconductor (Ion Torrent) 
Takes Single strand DNA dumps loose nucleotides and measures the H ion signaling to categorize the matches to make a complementary strand
Run time 100-200 per hour
Up Front 50k per run 1K


#10 Deena
Next Generation Sequencing techniques. 
Pyrosequencing (Roche 454): 
Reads the fastest
Sequences multiple reads at once
DNA & RNA are fragmented into shorter reads

Sequencing by synthesis (Illumina) 
Longer fragments are ligated
PCR used 
They are separated into single strands to be sequenced
Ion semiconductor (Ion Torrent) 
Most expensive. 
The slide is flooded with a single species along with buffers and polymerase, one NTP at a time. 
pH is detected in each well as the H+ ions are released, which decreases it.

Next Generation Sequencing techniques are also known as high throughput sequencing. It is the term used to describe different modern sequencing technologies that allow for the sequencing of DNA and RNA quicker and cheaper. 

Pyrosequencing:
Reads the fastest
similar to Illumina, it sequences multiple reads at once by reading optical signals as bases
DNA and RNA are fragmented into shorter reads. The fragments are then amplified by PCR aka polymerase chain reaction using adaptor specific primers
Light signals are released and they determine which beads the nucleotides are added to
Illumina: 
Longer fragments are ligated, or joined together to generic adaptors and heated to a slide. 
The PCR is carried out to amplify each read. 
They are separated into single strands to be sequenced
The nucleotides are flouorescently labelled with the color corresponding to the base, and there is also a terminated so only one base is being added at  time. 
The fluorescent signal indicates a base has been added. 

NTP: NUCLEOSIDE TRIPHOSPHATE

Ion semiconductor (Ion Torrent) 
Most expensive. 
The slide is flooded with a single species along with buffers and polymerase, one NTP at a time. 
pH is detected in each well as the H+ ions are released, which decreases it. The changes in PH allows us to determine is the base was added to the sequence read
dNTPs are washed away and the process is repeated cycling through different dNTP species
pH change is used to determine how many based were added with each cycle 
DNTP = deoxynucleotide triphosphates





#11 Tania
Polymerase Chain Reaction
DNA copy machine 
DNA polymerase = printer 
Using steps of replication
3 step process
Then and Now
HBB gene 
Miniaturized and portable 
Degenerate Primers
Designed based on amino acid sequences 
Different nucleotides at wobble position, that still code for same amino acid 
11. Briefly explain Polymerase Chain Reaction. How has PCR changed since its original design? What are degenerate primers?

#11 Meaghan
Briefly explain Polymerase Chain Reaction. 
Method used to rapidly make complete or partial copies of DNA 
Denaturation to break protein structure into single strand DNA 
Annealing of primers at a lower temperature 
Extension of DNA by growing complementary strand 
Product is 2 identical dsDNA  
Makes millions to billions of copies 
How has PCR changed since its original design? 
Originally used to detect mutations in sickle cells
Multiplexing of loci in one tube 
Quantitative analysis possible due to reverse transcription 
What are degenerate primers?
A mix of oligonucleotide sequences with all possible bases at a certain position 
Gives rise to possible primers for nucleotide variations of a given protein sequence

#12 Laura
12. What is Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA (RAPD). How is it used for bacterial identification from a handful of dirt? Compare to the 16S rDNA method for bacterial identification?
-Purpose is to test the relatedness of two organisms 

-Single primer to amplify fragments from a given template to produce a “fingerprint”

-Gel electrophoresis

-16s rRNA identifies species level and differentiates between close strains

#12 Iqbal
12. What is Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA (RAPD). How is it used for bacterial identification from a handful of dirt? Compare to the 16S rDNA method for bacterial identification?
RAPD is Ploymerase Chain reaction based method. For RAPD several arbitrary short primers 8-12 nucleotides are used which can bind randomly in genomic location. 
PRINCIPLE: Its is type of PCR but segments of DNA that are amplified are random. 
No knowledge of DNA sequence of targeted genom is required to perform this. Technique.
Application : Gene Mapping studies, crop variety identification and Microbial Strain identification
Advantages:  can be done with low amount of DNA.

GEL ELECTROPHOROSIS










#13 Hammad


Reverse Transcriptase
The process of DNA synthesis using  RNA as a Template
is known as Reverse Transcription.
Reverse transcriptase is RNA dependent DNA polymerase enzyme
That transcribes single stranded RNA into the DNA. (Hybrid DNA).
Reverse transcriptase role in Retroviruses
Retroviruses include an enzyme called reverse transcriptase,
The enzyme  which turns the RNA genome contained within the 
retrovirus particle into double-stranded DNA.
To create an RNA:DNA hybrid, reverse transcriptase 
            first transcribes a complementary strand of DNA.
Quantitative PCR / Real time PCR:
Nucleic acids are detected, described, and quantified using (qPCR).
RNA transcripts are measured in RT-qPCR by first reverse transcribed into cDNA, as mentioned above, and then qPCR is performed. 
Use in Biological Research:
quantitative measurement of gene copy number (gene dosage) 
in transformed cell lines or the presence of mutant genes.

#13 RT-PCR/qPCR - Ozzie
Reverse transcriptase and Retroviruses
Viruses use RNA dependent RNA polymerase aka Reverse transcriptase to convert RNA -> DNA
Retroviruses use RT to convert their RNA genome into double stranded DNA
Reverse transcriptase used in Polymerase chain reaction
Lab technique used to amplify specific DNA used to measure if specific RNA is present (Qualitative)

Quantitative PCR
Lab technique used to determine HOW MANY copies (Quantitative)

qPCR  used for in biological research
Used to measure changes in RNA levels do to either environment and or and drug being studied

Rna-dna
Retroviruses convert RNA to dsDNA
Two types of PCR Qualitative and quantitative
Yes its used to determine changes in RNA levels,,,, used because it sealed so less contamination and no need for electrophorisys 


Chapter 5

#14 Brianna
Name and briefly define the big 3 classes of RNA?
Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) - is a part of the structure of ribosomes 
Messenger RNA (mRNA) - aids in translation by making proteins  
Transfer RNA (tRNA) - transport amino acids to ribosome 

What are some other types of RNA classes? Choose two other types of RNA and go in-depth.
Non Coding small-interfering RNA (siRNA) - can identify specific mRNA and are able to tigger it to degrade 
CRISPR RNA (crRNA) - can be used in eukaryotic cells to alter genes by deleting them or to add tags/markers


#14 Rikita
14. Name and briefly define the big 3 classes of RNA? What are some other types of RNA classes? Choose two other types of RNA and go in-depth. 
Three classes of RNA
mRNA- transcribes the genetic  code from DNA into form that can used to make proteins.
rRNA- isolated in the cytoplasm of a cell, where ribosomes are found.
tRNA- tRNA is located in the cellular cytoplasm and is involved in protein synthesis.
Other types of RNA classes:
snRNA- small nuclear RNA
Regulatory RNAs
tmRNA- transfer-messenger RNA
Ribozymes (RNA enzymes)
dsRNA - double-stranded RNA


#15 Kher
Antisense RNA
Regulation of gene expression by targeting mRNA
Inhibits translation 
Dicer
cleaves dsRNA into siRNA
facilitates the activation of RISC
RISC (RNA-induced silencing complex)
Recognize complementary mRNA and cleaves it 
Triggered by dsRNA
Approved antisense therapies
Milasen 
Fomivirsen
Side effects 
Lower respiratory infection
Fever
Constipation
Vomiting

#15 Tania
Antisense RNA 
Regulatory RNA molecule 
Controls protein translation 
RNA interference pathway (RNAi)
dsRNA short double stranded RNA 
Dicer  endonuclease that cuts dsRNA into siRNA (small interfering RNA) 
RISC- RNA induced silencing complex 
Cleaves target mRNA 
Antisense Therapies 
Used for splicing defects 
Beta-thalassemia 
Nusinersen for spinal muscular dystrophy
Side effects
Fever, irritability, lethargy, muscle twitching 
15. What does antisense RNA control in the cell? 
	Antisense RNA is complementary to target mRNA, annealing of antisense and mRNA blocks either protein translation or splicing of introns 
Describe the roles of Dicer, dsRNA, RISC, and siRNA. 
Are there any antisense therapies currently in general use? 
	Beta thalassemia- blood disorder caused by extra splice sites 
	Nusinerson for spinal muscular dystrophy using antisense oligonucleotides, modulates splicing 
What are the side effects of these therapies?

#16 Iqbal
16. What are Ribozymes? What do they do? What are Riboswitches? What is the  potential of riboswitches in medicine?
An RNA molecule capable of acting as an enzyme
They have the ability to catalyze a specific biochemical reaction , including RNA splicing in gene expression similar to the action of protein enzyme.

#16 Ethan
16. What are Ribozymes? What do they do? What are Riboswitches? What is the  potential of riboswitches in medicine?
A ribozyme is an RNA molecule that acts like an enzyme
They are catalyzers that help speed up reactions 
Riboswitches are RNA elements that bind with ligands and can regulate mrna expression 
Could be the new form of antibiotic and possible cancerous gene regulation

#17 Brianna
What are some application for synthetic ribozymes?  
Suppress the expression of genes
such as genes for cancer and pathogenic viruses

How does in vitro Selection of Ribozymes work?
In vitro selection allows for the creation of new ribozymes 
Changing the ribozymes DNA through mutagenesis allows for it to become a better version of itself

#17 Kimberly 
17. Engineering Ribozymes. What are some application for synthetic ribozymes? How does in vitro Selection of Ribozymes work?
In vitro Selection
Allows new reactions to be seen from random RNA sequence

Applications:
Cancer treatments
Blocking of certain gene expressions

The End
